---
title: Julia Child's Paris — Sole Meunière and the Making of an Appetite
place: Paris (food)
themes: france-vs-america, endurance-of-everyday-life, aftermath-of-war
words: ~1400
---
There is a meal that a lot of Americans of a certain age can describe as if they were there, even though only one person actually was. It is November of nineteen forty-eight. A very tall American woman, six foot two, thirty-six years old, has just come off the boat at Le Havre with her husband, and they are driving to Paris in a big Buick they shipped over. They stop for lunch in Rouen, at a restaurant called La Couronne, which claims to be the oldest inn in France. And this woman, who cannot really cook, who has spent her life eating the bland, heavy, overcooked food of upper-middle-class California and Pasadena, sits down and is served oysters, and a sole meunière, a whole Dover sole cooked in nothing but butter, browned, with a little parsley and lemon. And something happens to her. She later called it an opening up of the soul and spirit. She said it was the most exciting meal of her life. That woman was Julia Child, and that lunch is, more or less, the moment American food history pivots.

Now, if you have seen the film, you know this scene. What I want to do is give you the fuller picture, the things the movie compressed or left out, because Julia Child's Paris is richer and stranger and more consequential than a charming story about a woman learning to debone a duck.

Start with who she actually was when she got off that boat, because it was not a bored housewife looking for a hobby. During the Second World War, Julia McWilliams had worked for the Office of Strategic Services, the O.S.S., the wartime American spy agency that was the ancestor of the C.I.A. She was not a spy in the trench-coat sense, but she handled a mountain of highly classified material, worked in Washington, and then shipped out to Ceylon, today Sri Lanka, and then to China, running the registry of secret documents for American intelligence in Asia. And it was there, in Ceylon in nineteen forty-four, that she met a colleague named Paul Child. Paul was a decade older, a worldly, artistic man, a painter and photographer who had lived in Paris in the nineteen twenties, spoke French, knew wine and food deeply, and had a cosmopolitan sophistication that the gangly, exuberant Julia did not yet have. They fell in love over good meals in wartime Asia, married after the war, and when the State Department posted Paul to the American embassy in Paris to run cultural exhibitions, he brought Julia back to the city he loved. So the person having that revelation at Rouen was not naive. She was a highly capable forty-something who had helped run secret operations across a world war. She simply had not yet found the thing she was put on earth to do. France handed it to her on a plate, with butter.

What she did next is the part I find genuinely heroic. She did not just take a few classes. She enrolled at the Cordon Bleu, the great Paris cooking school, in the professional course, alongside a group of American G.I.s studying on the government's dime. She was the only woman. She threw herself at the technique with an intensity that startled her teachers, chopping onions late into the night to get faster, mastering the French mother sauces, learning under an old master chef named Max Bugnard who had himself trained in the tradition that runs back to Escoffier. This is the deep grammar of French cooking we talked about at the Café, the codified technique that turned cooking into a discipline, and Julia went and got it at the source, in Paris, by sheer force of will. She was, remember, an American woman in an era that did not exactly encourage American women to become obsessive technical experts at anything.

And here is where the story opens out past the movie, into the two French women most people have never heard of. In Paris, Julia joined forces with Simone Beck and Louisette Bertholle, two Frenchwomen who were working on a French cookbook for Americans. The three of them founded a little cooking school in Julia's Paris kitchen, which they called L'École des Trois Gourmandes, the school of the three hearty eaters. And out of that partnership came the real monument. Not a TV show, that came later. A book. The three of them spent the better part of a decade testing and retesting recipes with scientific rigor, because Julia understood something crucial. American home cooks did not fail at French food because they were stupid or lazy. They failed because the recipes were vague, assuming knowledge no American had. So she and her collaborators wrote everything down, every step, every temperature, every reason, translating not just the language but the entire tacit craft of the French kitchen into instructions an American in Ohio could actually follow. The book was Mastering the Art of French Cooking, published in nineteen sixty-one, and it did something no army or treaty could. It moved a whole cuisine across the Atlantic and into ordinary kitchens.

But I promised context beyond the food, and the darkest chapter belongs to Paul, and to the moment they were living through. While Julia was learning to cook in Paris, back home the United States was in the grip of the Red Scare, the anti-Communist panic driven by Senator Joseph McCarthy. And the machinery of that panic reached across the ocean and grabbed the Childs. In nineteen fifty-five, Paul, by then posted to Germany, was abruptly summoned back to Washington and interrogated. The investigators were chasing his old O.S.S. connections, in particular his friendship with a woman named Jane Foster, who had come under suspicion as a possible Soviet agent. And the interrogation turned uglier still. This was also the era of what historians now call the Lavender Scare, the systematic purge of gay men and lesbians from the American government, on the theory that they were security risks. Paul, a sensitive artist who had lived in bohemian Paris, was accused, to his face, of homosexual tendencies. He was made to answer for his character, his loyalty, his very nature. He and Julia were shaken and disgusted by it, and they refused to save themselves by informing on their friend. It hardened them both into lifelong opponents of that kind of political witch-hunt. So the woman America came to know as a jolly grandmother teaching you to flip an omelet had watched her husband be hauled in and humiliated by his own government during one of the ugliest episodes in modern American life. That is not in the movie, or not much.

And there is a through-line here that ties Julia Child to nearly everything else on this trip. Think about what she represents. She is the American in Paris, in the long tradition of Franklin and Jefferson we talked about, of the Americans who came to France and were changed by it and carried something home. But where Jefferson carried back ideas about liberty, Julia carried back something humbler and in its way just as powerful, the conviction that ordinary daily life, a good meal cooked with care and eaten without hurry, is one of the things that makes a civilization worth having. That is the most French idea imaginable, and it is the idea this whole series keeps circling, that the enduring stuff of life is not the battles and the manifestos but the table. Postwar America was rich and anxious and increasingly living on canned soup and frozen dinners, food engineered for speed. Julia Child looked at that and said, no, slow down, it is worth doing properly, and here is exactly how. She was, in a sense, importing the French relationship to time and pleasure into a country that had forgotten it.

Paul, by the way, was essential to all of it, and largely invisible. He photographed the step-by-step techniques for the book, designed diagrams, poured the wine, built the life that made her work possible, and did it without ever needing the spotlight, which for a man of his generation was its own kind of quiet radicalism. The film got that much exactly right.

So when you walk the Left Bank, and you pass the food shops and the little restaurants, remember that somewhere near here, in a fourth-floor apartment she called Roo de Loo, an American woman who had helped fight a world war taught herself to cook, and in doing so changed how millions of people at home would eat for generations. She did not discover French food. She did something more useful. She carried it across the ocean and made it speakable, one buttery, browned, perfectly simple fillet of sole at a time.
