---
title: The Guillotine and the Problem of Legitimacy
place: Paris, Place de la Concorde
themes: legitimacy, france-vs-america, fate-of-aristocracies
words: ~1300
---

Stand for a moment in the middle of the Place de la Concorde. It is the largest public square in Paris, and probably the most trafficked open space you will cross on your entire walk. Cars stream around it in a great impatient orbit. Two fountains throw water into the light. And at the center, rising more than seventy feet, stands a pink granite obelisk older than almost anything else in the city, its sides covered in hieroglyphs. It is a genuinely calm, even beautiful place. Which is exactly why it is worth pausing here, because this serene square is where the French monarchy was killed. Not just defeated. Not just outvoted. Killed, deliberately, in public, on a winter morning, in front of a crowd.

Let me give you the ground you are standing on, because the name of this square has changed almost as many times as France has changed its mind about how it wants to be governed. It began as the Place Louis the Fifteenth, laid out in the middle of the seventeen hundreds to honor the king, with a grand equestrian statue of him at its heart. Then came the Revolution. In August of seventeen ninety-two the statue was torn down and the square was renamed the Place de la Révolution. That is the name it bore on the twenty-first of January, seventeen ninety-three, when they brought Louis the Sixteenth here in a closed carriage and executed him by guillotine at around ten in the morning. His wife, Marie Antoinette, followed him to the same spot on the sixteenth of October that same year. Later, in a gesture of exhausted hope, the square was renamed once more, this time the Place de la Concorde, concord, agreement, peace, as if a new name could smooth over what had happened here. The obelisk you are looking at came much later still, a gift from the ruler of Egypt, erected at the center of the square in eighteen thirty-six, partly, one suspects, to give this haunted ground something to be about other than blood. Those are the settled facts, well documented and not in serious dispute.

Now here is where I want to slow down, because I am going to make an argument, and I want to be honest that it is an argument, an interpretation, not a fact you could look up. The claim is this. The execution of Louis the Sixteenth was not really about killing a man. It was about killing an idea. And the idea was the one that had held France together for a thousand years, the idea that the king ruled by the will of God.

Think about what divine right actually asks of people. It asks them to believe that this particular human being, by birth, by anointing, by the mysterious sanction of heaven, is qualitatively different from everyone else. That he is the living hinge between the earthly and the sacred. A king like that cannot simply be voted out, because his authority was never granted by the people in the first place. It came from above. And so for centuries the person of the king was, quite literally, untouchable. To lay hands on him was not politics. It was blasphemy.

Which is what makes that January morning so extraordinary, and I think so genuinely revolutionary in a way the word usually fails to capture. They did lay hands on him. They tried him as a citizen, Citizen Louis Capet, stripped of the royal name. They found him guilty. And then, in the most public space imaginable, before thousands of witnesses, they killed him. And here is the part that mattered most. The sky did not fall. There was no divine retribution. No thunderbolt, no plague, no sign from heaven that a sacred order had been violated. There was just a dead man, a cheering and uneasy crowd, and a country that woke up the next morning and still had to bake bread and feed its children.

And once that has happened, once you have killed the king in the open air and the heavens stay silent, something can never be put back. The mystery is gone. The spell is broken. Because the terrible secret of monarchy, of any authority really, is that it runs on belief. This is the through-line I keep coming back to on this podcast, and I think this square is where it shows itself most nakedly. Legitimacy is downstream of belief. A king is powerful not because of some property in his body but because millions of people have agreed, mostly without ever deciding to, to act as though he is. The crown, the throne, the anointing oil, all of it is a kind of shared story. And the guillotine on the Place de la Révolution was, in a sense, an argument against that story, made in the most literal terms available. It said, watch, he is just a man, and we can prove it.

There is a grim detail here worth naming, because it fits the theme so precisely. The guillotine itself was defended, by some of its advocates, as an instrument of equality. Before the Revolution, how you were executed depended on your rank. A nobleman had the relative mercy of the sword or the axe. A commoner might be broken on the wheel or hanged, slower and more degrading. The guillotine was pitched as a leveler, one mechanism, one swift death, the same for a king and for a pickpocket. Whether its inventors were truly moved by mercy or by ideology, historians still debate, so hold that loosely. But the symbolism is hard to miss. The machine that killed the king killed him the same way it killed everyone else. That was the point. The body that had been sacred became, in one stroke, ordinary.

Now think about your own country, and the contrast is almost startling. America faced the same eighteenth-century question, the great Enlightenment question, where does legitimate authority actually come from. And America gave a completely different answer, one that never required a scaffold. The United States never had to kill a king. It simply declined to have one. When the framers reached for the source of authority, they did not reach up toward heaven, they reached out toward the people, and wrote, we the people. That is a document that locates legitimacy in consent from the very first words. France arrived at a version of the same idea, but it had to get there by way of the blade, by shattering the old belief before it could build a new one. Two answers to one question. One written on parchment in Philadelphia, the other written in a Paris square in blood and then, tellingly, renamed for peace.

I do not want to romanticize either path. The American refusal to have a king coexisted for a long time with slavery, a rather large asterisk on we the people. And the French did not exactly land in gentle concord. The same square that killed the king went on, during the Terror, to kill thousands more, until the machine consumed the very men who had defended it. Belief, it turns out, is a hard thing to rebuild once you have shown a nation how to break it.

So as you stand here, with the traffic and the fountains and that ancient Egyptian obelisk keeping its silent watch over the exact ground where a thousand-year-old idea was put to death, hold both things at once. This is a beautiful, ordinary square where Parisians cross to catch a bus and tourists take photographs. And that ordinariness is itself the deepest point. The kings are gone, the Revolution is gone, the Terror is gone. What endures is the water in the fountains, the light on the stone, and the plain daily life that outlasts every throne. The belief that made a king was fragile. The bread, it turns out, was not.
