---
title: The Glow in the Garden — Marie Curie's Paris
place: Paris, the Latin Quarter
themes: legitimacy-of-merit, france-vs-america, run-up-to-war
words: ~1400
---
She is one of the most extraordinary people ever to walk the streets you have been walking, and her story starts a short distance from where you are. If you go a little east from Saint-Germain-des-Prés, up into the Latin Quarter around the Sorbonne, you come to a street that is actually named rue Pierre et Marie Curie, and on it stands the old Radium Institute, which today houses the Curie Museum. It is small, and free, and quietly one of the most moving rooms in Paris, because you can stand in her actual office and laboratory. This is the ground where the modern understanding of the atom was partly born, worked out by a woman who was not even allowed to be a citizen of her own country.

Because that is where she began. She was born Maria Skłodowska in Warsaw in eighteen sixty-seven, in a Poland that did not exist on the map. It had been carved up among Russia, Prussia, and Austria, and her part was under the Russian Empire, which meant her language and her culture were actively suppressed. She grew up brilliant and blocked, because the University of Warsaw did not admit women. So she did what so many talented, thwarted people did in that era, and what will become a theme of this episode, she emigrated. In eighteen ninety-one she came to Paris, to the Sorbonne, one of the few great universities in Europe that would let a woman enroll. She was poor. She lived in a freezing garret, sometimes fainting from hunger while she studied, and she came first in her class in physics. France gave her something Poland could not, a place to become herself. That is worth remembering when we talk, as we have on this trip, about France and its ideals. The Republic's promise of a career open to talent was not always kept, but for Marie Skłodowska it was real enough to change the world.

In Paris she met Pierre Curie, a gifted, dreamy physicist, and they married in eighteen ninety-five in a ceremony so unfussy that her wedding outfit was just a dark dress she could afterward wear in the lab. And then together, in a leaky, freezing shed that a visiting German chemist later called a cross between a stable and a potato cellar, they did something monumental. Working with tons of a heavy black ore called pitchblende, stirring boiling vats with an iron rod nearly as tall as she was, Marie chased an invisible property she named radioactivity, a word she coined. She was pulling apart the idea, until then a bedrock assumption of physics, that the atom was solid, permanent, indivisible. It was not. Some atoms were quietly, ceaselessly flying apart, throwing off energy from within. From that pitchblende the Curies isolated two new elements. One she named polonium, after her lost homeland, a small act of defiance encoded into the periodic table. The other they named radium, the ray-thing, because it glowed.

And that glow brings us to the evening I most want you to picture. In the summer of nineteen oh-three, Marie Curie defended her doctoral thesis at the Sorbonne, becoming the first woman in France ever to earn a doctorate. Her examiners said her work was the greatest contribution ever made to science by a doctoral thesis. That night there was a small celebration, and among the guests was Ernest Rutherford, the New Zealand-born physicist who would go on to discover the structure of the atom himself, one of the towering figures of the age. After dinner, the party drifted out into the garden in the dark. And Pierre reached into his pocket and took out a small glass tube, partly coated inside with a solution of radium, and held it up. And it glowed. A faint, eerie, blue-green light in the darkness, bright enough to see the faces around it, bright enough that Rutherford could see Pierre's hands, which were already inflamed and scarred from handling the stuff. I want to be honest that the story has been retold and burnished over the years, so I hold the finest details loosely, but the core is well attested, and it is almost unbearably poignant. Here were some of the most brilliant minds of the coming century, standing in a Paris garden, marveling at a beautiful light. And that light was killing the people who made it. Nobody yet understood that the glow was radiation tearing through living tissue. The very substance they were toasting would give Marie the illness that eventually killed her. It is the whole twentieth century in a single image, the wonder and the danger of the atom, held in one glowing vial, in a garden, on a summer night.

That same year, nineteen oh-three, the Nobel Prize in Physics went to Marie, Pierre, and Henri Becquerel. Marie was the first woman ever to win a Nobel. Then, in nineteen oh-six, tragedy. Pierre, crossing a rainy Paris street near the Pont Neuf, slipped and fell under a heavy horse-drawn wagon, and was killed instantly. Marie was widowed at thirty-eight with two small daughters. And the Sorbonne did something it had never done, it gave her Pierre's professorship, making her the first woman ever to teach there. When she walked into the lecture hall to begin, the room was packed with the curious and the press, waiting to see what she would say. She began exactly where Pierre had left off in his final lecture. No speech about herself. Just the physics.

Now here is where our darker theme enters, the one you asked me to draw out. In nineteen eleven Marie won a second Nobel Prize, this time in Chemistry, the first person of any sex to win two. She should have been a national hero. Instead, that same year, the Paris papers discovered that she was having an affair with the physicist Paul Langevin, who was married. And the reaction was ferocious, and it was ugly in a specific way. The press did not just attack her as a woman who had transgressed. They attacked her as a foreigner, a Pole, an interloper who had come to France and stolen a French wife's husband. And they reached for the oldest slander in Europe, falsely insinuating that she was Jewish, as if that would explain her rootlessness and her threat. She was not Jewish, but the point of the smear was that it did not matter. To a rising nationalist, antisemitic strain in French life, a brilliant foreigner was suspect by definition. This was the France of the Dreyfus Affair, remember, which had convulsed the country only a decade before, when a Jewish army officer was falsely convicted of treason and the nation tore itself in two over whether a Jew could really be French. Marie Curie, the greatest scientist in France, got a taste of the same poison. A mob gathered outside her house. She had to be sheltered by friends.

And this is the thread that runs from that garden straight into the catastrophe ahead. The Europe that produced Marie Curie, cosmopolitan, scientific, where a Polish woman could come to Paris and remake physics, was also the Europe brewing the hatreds that would explode into two world wars. The same decades that gave us the glowing vial gave us the nationalism and the antisemitism that, thirty years later, would drive the greatest scientists of the continent, many of them Jewish, out of Germany and across the Atlantic. Einstein, Fermi, Szilard, the whole brain trust that would eventually build the atomic bomb in the deserts of America, were refugees from exactly the forces that had once howled outside Marie Curie's door. The physics she opened, the splitting atom, would become the most terrible weapon ever made, in the hands of scientists who fled a Europe consuming itself. Curie herself did not live to see it. She died in nineteen thirty-four, of a blood disease caused by a lifetime of radiation, her body carrying the dose of that beautiful light. Her notebooks are still radioactive today. You have to sign a waiver to read them.

So when you stand in that little museum on the rue Pierre et Marie Curie, hold all of it at once. The poor Polish girl the Republic let in and let rise. The glow in the garden that was wonder and death together. The hero hounded as a foreigner by the same hatreds that were coming for the whole world. Her life is the twentieth century in miniature, its genius and its darkness, and it happened right here, a short walk from where you slept.
