---
title: Laïcité — Why France Does Secularism Differently
place: France (thematic)
themes: church-vs-state, france-vs-america, legitimacy
words: ~1300
voice-notes: numbers and years spelled for the ear
---
You are walking through Paris, and sooner or later you will pass a church that the state owns. Notre-Dame, Saint-Sulpice, the Madeleine — these great stone buildings belong to the French government, not to the Catholic Church, and the priests who serve in them do so as guests in a public building. Hold that image, because it is the physical residue of one of the most interesting arguments France ever had with itself, and it is the doorway into something that trips up almost every American who tries to understand this country. France and the United States both separate church and state. They both, on paper, keep religion and government in different rooms. But they did it for opposite reasons, in opposite spirits, and once you see why, a great deal of what feels strange about modern France suddenly clicks into place.

Start with the American version, because it is the one you already carry in your bones. The First Amendment was ratified in seventeen ninety-one, and its opening words forbid Congress from establishing a religion or interfering with the free exercise of one. Now, who was that wall built to protect? Read the history and the answer is clear: it was built to protect religion from the government. America was settled in large part by dissenting sects — Puritans, Quakers, Baptists, Catholics in Maryland — people who had fled established churches that told them how to pray. They did not want a national church because so many of them had been on the wrong end of one. So the American settlement says to the state: keep your hands off faith. And the striking consequence is that American public life is soaked in religion precisely because the state was told to leave it alone. Presidents swear the oath with a hand on a Bible. The money in your pocket reads "In God We Trust" — which, worth knowing, became the official national motto only in nineteen fifty-six, under Eisenhower, at the height of the Cold War, though the phrase had appeared on coins since the eighteen-sixties. The wall, in America, protects the church from the state.

France built its wall facing the other direction. French secularism has a name of its own — laïcité — and there is really no English word for it, which is itself a clue that we are dealing with a different animal. Laïcité is not about protecting the church from the state. It is about protecting the state, and the citizen, from the church. And to understand why, you have to go back to the thing we keep circling on this trip: the long absolutist project of the French crown, and the way it wound itself around the Catholic Church until the two could barely be told apart.

For centuries the kings of France carried a title granted by the pope himself — the Most Christian King, sa Majesté Très Chrétienne. The monarch was anointed with holy oil at his coronation in Reims, made sacred, made legitimate, by the Church. This is the theme we have hit again and again: legitimacy is downstream of belief. The French king did not rule merely because he had armies; he ruled because a vast shared story said that God had put him there, and the Church was the institution that told that story and blessed it. Throne and altar were not allies so much as a single structure. And that is exactly why, when the Revolution came in seventeen eighty-nine to tear down the throne, it could not leave the altar standing. The two were load-bearing walls in the same building. The revolutionaries seized Church lands, put the clergy on the state payroll and demanded their loyalty, and for a delirious stretch tried to replace Catholicism outright with cults of Reason and of a Supreme Being. Here is the deep point, and I want to flag it as my interpretation rather than settled fact: in America, going after government power and going after church power were separate questions. In France they were the same motion, because royal power and church power were the same thing.

The Revolution did not settle it cleanly. What came next was more than a century of open warfare, sometimes literal, between two Frances — a Catholic, monarchist, rural France on one side, and a secular, republican, anticlerical France on the other. Napoleon tried to buy peace in eighteen-oh-one with an agreement called the Concordat, a deal struck with the pope. The state would recognize Catholicism as the religion of most French people and would pay the clergy's salaries; in return the Church would drop its claim to the lands the Revolution had confiscated and would, in effect, work with the regime. That bargain held, more or less, for over a hundred years. It made the French state and the Catholic Church business partners again — which, if you were a republican who remembered whose side the Church had taken, was intolerable.

And so we arrive at the law that gives laïcité its spine: the law of nineteen-oh-five on the separation of the Churches and the State — note the plural, the Churches, deliberately refusing to privilege any single one. Passed by the Third Republic on the third of July, nineteen-oh-five, it tore up Napoleon's Concordat. The state would no longer pay a single clergyman's salary, would no longer recognize or fund any religion at all. The buildings — those cathedrals and parish churches built before the split — became public property, which is why the French Republic today owns Notre-Dame and lends it back to the faithful to worship in. The pope, Pius the Tenth, condemned the law furiously. But it held, and it became one of the founding pillars of the Republic. Notice the spirit of it. This was not a nation of nervous sects asking to be left alone. This was a confident, muscular state pushing an old rival — a rival that had propped up kings — out of the public square and firmly into private life.

That difference in spirit is the whole thing, and it explains the headlines that so often baffle Americans. Because French secularism is assertive rather than merely permissive, it does not just decline to sponsor religion — it actively works to keep religion out of the public sphere, especially the sphere of the state and above all the schools, which the Republic treats as the sacred factory where citizens are made. In two thousand and four, France passed a law banning conspicuous religious symbols in public schools — the Muslim headscarf, the Jewish skullcap, the large Christian cross, the Sikh turban. To an American this looks like a straightforward violation of religious freedom; the government is telling a child what she may not wear to school. To a French republican it is the opposite: it is the state guaranteeing that the public space stays neutral, that no child is marked or divided by faith while inside the Republic's own house. Whether that is liberation or coercion is, genuinely, one of the great unresolved arguments of modern France, and I will not pretend to resolve it for you. I only want you to see that it flows with perfect logic from nineteen-oh-five, and from seventeen eighty-nine before it, and from the anointed kings before that.

So here are your two nations, two answers to the same Enlightenment question about where authority should live once you stop taking it from God and king. America, a country of believers suspicious of government, built a wall to keep the state out of the church, and ended up with God on its money and a Bible under its presidents' hands. France, a country that watched the Church hold up a throne for a thousand years, built a wall to keep the church out of the state, and ended up owning its own cathedrals and policing headscarves in its schoolrooms. Same wall. Opposite sides. And when you walk past Saint-Sulpice this afternoon and remember that the Republic, not the Church, holds the keys, you will be looking at the visible seam where an absolute monarchy was finally, and permanently, pried loose from the God that once made it legitimate.
