---
title: The Painted Promise
place: Paris — Gare de Lyon
themes: centralized-vs-distributed power, everyday endurance, France-and-America
words: ~1300
---
Before you board, look up.

You are in the Gare de Lyon, in the great hall where the departure boards flicker and everyone stands with their heads tilted back, waiting for a platform number to appear. The French have an old name for a room like this. They call it the salle des pas perdus, the hall of lost steps, because it is a place where people pace and circle and wait, where footsteps go nowhere in particular until the train is called. And high on the wall, above all that waiting, running the length of the upper level between the first hall and the second, there is a painting almost a hundred meters long. Most people never notice it. They are looking at the boards, not the wall. But if you lift your eyes, you will see a strip of sunlit country unrolling above your head, town after town after town, painted in warm light, and it is worth understanding what it is and why it is there, because it is, in the most literal sense, a picture of the trip you are about to take.

This is the Grande Fresque de la Gare de Lyon. Although I should flag right away that fresco is not quite the right word. A true fresco is painted into wet plaster, so the color soaks into the wall itself. This is something else. These are paintings on canvas, on linen, glued up onto the wall afterward, a technique the French call marouflage. So when people call it a fresco, they are using the word loosely. It looks like one from the floor, and that is close enough for most purposes, but I like to keep the distinction, because it tells you something. This was not a sacred wall being decorated for eternity. This was a commercial surface, and the paintings were, quite frankly, advertising.

Here is the story. In the year 1900, Paris hosted the Exposition Universelle, one of those enormous world's fairs that cities used to throw to show off everything modern and magnificent about themselves. The Eiffel Tower had gone up for the previous fair, in 1889. For 1900, the whole city was scrubbed and rebuilt and lit up, and the railway company that ran the lines south rebuilt this station to match the occasion. That company had a long name that tells you exactly where its trains went. It was the Compagnie Paris-Lyon-Méditerranée, the Paris to Lyon to the Mediterranean company, known simply as the P L M. And the P L M understood something that every railroad in the world was figuring out at the same time. A train is not only a way to move people who already want to go somewhere. A train can manufacture the desire to go. It can invent the destination.

So the company commissioned this enormous painted band, and it filled it with the towns its trains served. And when you read off the names, town by town, you are reading your own itinerary. There is Lyon, where your river cruise will end. There is Avignon, where the popes once lived, where you will stop along the Rhône. Nîmes, Montpellier, Marseille, Toulon, and then the coast, Nice, Monte Carlo, Menton, the string of sunlit resorts on the Riviera. Each one painted not as it necessarily looked on a gray Tuesday in February, but as you would most want it to look, drenched in Mediterranean light, blue water, warm stone, elegant people in their traveling clothes strolling in the sun. This is the south as a promise. The message to the traveler standing in the cold Paris hall was very simple. All of this is at the other end of the platform. Buy a ticket.

And I find that genuinely moving, in a way, because it is one of the earliest and grandest pieces of travel advertising ever made, and it worked. It helped invent modern tourism, the whole idea that an ordinary prosperous person might go south for pleasure, for the light, for the food, for the sheer restorative fact of the sun. That was a new idea in 1900. The train made it possible, and paintings like this one made it desirable.

But there is a deeper thing going on here, and it goes to the heart of what France is. Notice who is doing the depicting. This is Paris, painting portraits of the provinces. The capital, gathering up all the regions of the south, Provence, the Rhône valley, the coast, arranging them in a neat sunlit row on a wall in Paris, and presenting them to the traveler as things to be visited, consumed, enjoyed. There is a long French habit in that gesture. For centuries the project of the French state was to pull every corner of the country toward the center, toward Paris, toward the crown and later the Republic. The regions had their own languages, their own foods, their own fierce local identities, and the great national story was about drawing all of that into a single France with Paris at its heart. And here, in a train station, you can watch that same logic playing out in paint. The provinces become a spectacle organized by the capital. The lines all run to Paris and back. The map has a center, and you are standing in it.

An American feels this differently, and it is worth naming why. The United States never had a single center in this way. It grew with many centers at once, competing cities strung across a continent, and no Exposition, no single hall of lost steps that the whole nation passed through. When American railroads advertised the sunny distances, California, Florida, the desert Southwest, they were not gathering the country toward one capital. They were selling the frontier, the escape, the open land beyond. Two countries, two ways of imagining space. France pulls inward toward the center. America pushes outward toward the edge. And you can read both national instincts right off the walls of their railway stations, if you know to look.

Now, the painting you are looking at was not made all at once, and that is part of its charm. The oldest panels, the six Mediterranean cities, were painted in 1900 for the fair by an artist named Jean-Baptiste Olive. More were added in the 1920s and 30s as the network grew. And then, remarkably, a whole new stretch was painted as late as 1981, adding the towns of the Paris to Lyon run, Fontainebleau, Vézelay, Dijon, Beaune, the heart of Burgundy. So this single painting was built up over more than eighty years, by different hands, in different decades, all keeping to the same sunny idea. It is a mural that grew the way a rail network grows, one line at a time. In 1984 the whole gallery was classified as a historic monument, which means the French state now protects an advertisement as a piece of national heritage. There is something almost funny in that, and also something true. The advertisement outlived the thing it was advertising. The old P L M company is long gone, folded into the national railway decades ago. But the painting remains, and every day about a hundred thousand people walk beneath it without looking up.

So look up. Because in a few minutes you will walk down onto the platform, and the train will carry you into the very landscape painted over your head, Lyon, Avignon, the valley of the Rhône, the towns arranged on the wall becoming the towns outside the window. You are about to step into the picture. That is a rare thing, to see the promise first and then live it. Most advertising asks you only to imagine. This one you get to board.
