---
title: The Midi — How the South Became France
place: TGV (Paris to Arles, travel day)
themes: centralized-vs-distributed-power, fate-of-regions, church-vs-state
words: ~1350
---
Somewhere in the second half of this train ride, without any announcement, you will cross a border. There is no sign for it, no passport check, no line drawn on the map, but it is as real as any frontier France has ever had. The roofs will start to change, from the steep dark slate of the north, built to shed rain and snow, to the low, gently pitched terracotta tiles of the south, built for sun. The light will get harder and whiter. You will start to see the first olive trees, the first cypresses standing like dark exclamation points against the hills. And you will have entered what the French simply call le Midi, the south, literally the noon, the place where the sun sits highest. What I want to tell you on this ride is that you are not just crossing a landscape. You are crossing the seam of one of the great absorptions in French history, the story of how the south became France at all, because for a very long time it was something else.

Here is the thing that gets lost when we say a country's name as if it were eternal. In the Middle Ages there was no France in the sense we mean now. There was a king in Paris who directly controlled a fairly modest territory around the capital, and beyond that a patchwork of duchies and counties that owed him loyalty in theory and did as they pleased in practice. And the further south you went, the truer that was. Down here, in the lands along the Mediterranean and up the Rhône, was a civilization that a northern French king could barely call his own. They did not even speak the same language. In the north people spoke the langue d'oïl, the ancestor of modern French. In the south they spoke the langue d'oc, Occitan, a Romance language closer in some ways to Catalan across the mountains in Spain than to the French of Paris. The two tongues were named, wonderfully, after their words for yes, oïl in the north, oc in the south. A whole civilization divided by how it says yes. The very word Languedoc, the great region this train is carrying you toward, simply means the language of oc.

And this southern world was, by the standards of the twelfth century, dazzling. This was the country of the troubadours, the poet-musicians who more or less invented the whole Western idea of romantic love, of the lover who yearns and serves and idealizes his lady. The courts of the south were sophisticated, tolerant, cosmopolitan, trading across the Mediterranean, rubbing shoulders with the Islamic and Jewish learning of Spain. It was, and here I am giving you the romantic reading that later southerners cherished, so take it with a grain of salt, a brilliant alternative civilization to the colder, more militarized feudal north. And it had one more feature that would prove fatal. It tolerated heretics.

The heretics were the Cathars, and they held a set of beliefs the medieval Church regarded as poison. They were dualists. They believed the material world was the creation of an evil power and the spirit alone was good, which led them to reject the wealth and hierarchy of the Catholic Church entirely, and that rejection was enormously appealing in a south that watched its bishops grow fat. The Cathars flourished in these tolerant southern towns, protected, or at least not persecuted, by the local nobility. And that is what brought the north down on the south like a hammer, in a story that ties directly to a thread we keep pulling on this trip, the long war between church and state, and between the center and the regions.

In the year twelve hundred and nine, Pope Innocent the Third declared a crusade. Not against Muslims in the Holy Land, but against Christians, here, in the south of France. It is called the Albigensian Crusade, after the town of Albi, and it is one of the darker episodes in European history, Christians slaughtering Christians in the name of purity. And the northern French nobles who answered the call understood exactly what was on offer. This was a chance, blessed by the Church, to seize the rich lands of the south. There is a line attributed to the campaign, when the crusaders took the town of Béziers and someone asked how to tell the good Catholics from the heretics, the reply was said to be, kill them all, God will know his own. Historians doubt the words were ever actually spoken, so I will flag that as legend rather than fact, but the town was massacred all the same, thousands of people, and the phrase survives because it captures something true about the pitilessness of what happened.

The crusade ground on for twenty years. And when the dust settled, the real winner was not the Church and not even religious orthodoxy, because the Cathar faith took generations more to fully stamp out. The real winner was the king of France. In twelve twenty-nine, the Treaty of Paris ended the war, and the great County of Toulouse, the heart of the independent south, was bound over to the French crown. Within a couple of generations the whole Mediterranean south, this brilliant, separate, Occitan-speaking world, had been absorbed into the kingdom ruled from Paris. The crusade that began as a war on heresy ended as a land grab that roughly doubled the reach of the French monarchy toward the sea. This is the absolutist project in one of its earliest and rawest forms, the center swallowing a rival center, using the Church as its instrument and justification. And the way I read it, this is the template for everything that comes later, for Louis the Fourteenth pulling the nobility into Versailles, for the Revolution erasing the old provinces, even for the railway you are riding, every one of them an act of Paris reaching out and pulling the pieces of France into itself.

But here is what I find moving about it, and it connects to the deepest theme of this whole journey. The south was conquered. Its independence was broken, its nobles humbled, its heretics burned. And yet the south is still unmistakably, stubbornly itself. You are about to spend a week in it. You will hear it in the accent, which sings in a way Parisian French does not. You will see it in those terracotta roofs and the plane trees shading every village square. You will taste it, above all, at the table, in the olive oil and the garlic and the tomatoes and the herbs, a whole cuisine that has far more in common with Italy and Spain across the water than with the butter and cream of the north. The kings took the land. They took the sovereignty and the taxes and the loyalty. What they could not take was the everyday life, the way a people cooks and speaks and sits in the shade at noon. Occitan is still spoken. The old language clings to the place-names you will roll past, and it clung hard enough that France, centuries later, would try again and again to stamp it out in the schools, which tells you it never fully died.

There is an American echo here, and I will offer it carefully because these things are never exact. Think of the American South, another proud, distinct region absorbed by force into a larger nation, its separateness broken by an army, and yet a place that held on fiercely to its own food, its own music, its own cadence of speech long after the political question was settled. Conquest can redraw a map in an afternoon. It cannot so easily redraw a culture. Nations are made by the sword and the treaty, but they are lived in the kitchen and the vineyard and the song.

So watch for the moment the roofs go red and the first olive tree slides past the window. You are crossing from one France into another, older one, a country that said yes in a different language and paid for its difference in blood, and then quietly went on being itself anyway. By the time you step off this train in Arles, you will be standing in the Midi. And now you know a little of what it cost to make that word mean France.
