---
title: Arles as Rome
place: Arles
themes: centralized-power, endurance-of-everyday-life, rome-and-america
words: ~1300
voice-notes: numbers spelled for the ear; ancient dates read aloud
---
Stand at the edge of the Arles amphitheater, the Arènes, and let the size of it settle on you before you say anything clever about it. Two tiers of arches, more than a hundred of them, a great stone oval built in the last years of the first century, around ninety in the common era, when Rome was near the height of its confidence. It held something like twenty thousand people. And here is the first thing to hold onto, the thing that makes Arles different from a ruin: it is not a ruin. In the Middle Ages people moved inside it and built houses and even churches within the arena, turning it into a walled town of its own, and later that whole tangle was cleared out. But the bones stayed, and the bones still work. In the summer you can buy a ticket and sit on that ancient stone to watch a bullfight during the Feria, or a concert, or a play. Two thousand years on, the town still gathers where the Romans built it to gather. Keep that in your mind, because we are going to come back to it.

Now, why is there a monument like this in a modest town on the Rhône at all? The answer is a piece of luck that Arles earned, and it turns on one of the great gambles of ancient history. In the year forty-nine before the common era, Julius Caesar crossed the Rubicon and plunged Rome into civil war against Pompey. Down here in the south, the old and wealthy Greek city of Massalia, what is now Marseille, made a choice: it sided with Pompey. Arles, then called Arelate, sided with Caesar. And Arelate did more than cheer. Its shipyards built warships for Caesar's siege of Massalia. Caesar won that siege, and he won the war, and when the accounts were settled Massalia was stripped of much of its wealth and territory, and a good deal of it was handed to Arles. A few years later Caesar planted a colony of army veterans here, men of the Sixth Legion, and Arelate became a proper Roman colonia, a Roman city with Roman citizens, Roman law, and Roman ambition. That is the lesson under the stone: in the Roman world, as in ours, backing the right patron at the right moment could remake a town's fortunes for centuries. Arles bet on Caesar and collected for the next four hundred years.

And it kept collecting. Walk a few minutes from the amphitheater and you come to the Roman theater, older than the arena, from the time of Augustus, now a scatter of tiered seating and two lonely standing columns that the locals call the two widows. Walk a little further and you find the ruins of the Baths of Constantine, the Thermes de Constantin. That name is worth pausing on. Constantine the Great, the emperor who turned Rome toward Christianity, spent real time in Arles in the early fourth century. The city became something like an imperial residence, and those baths were part of a palace complex. You can still see the great vaulted apse of the hot room and the brick pillars of the hypocaust, the underfloor heating system that pushed warm air beneath the bathers' feet. An American standing there might reasonably think of a town that had gone from frontier settlement to the kind of place an emperor chose to stay. That is a genuine claim to grandeur, and Arles has never entirely stopped making it.

Here is the bigger idea I want to hand you, and I will flag it clearly as interpretation rather than plain fact. Provence itself is named for Rome. The Romans called this region simply Provincia, the Province, because it was their first province beyond the Alps, the first big chunk of what is now France that Rome organized and governed directly. Provincia became Provence. So the very ground you are traveling through carries, in its name, the memory of being administered from a distant capital. And that, to my mind, is the deep through-line of this whole trip. Rome was the original centralizing machine. It built straight roads radiating out from a capital, it imposed one system of law, it stamped a uniform administration onto wildly different peoples, and it tied the edges of the world back to the center. Every later French centralizer echoes that template, whether they knew it or not. The kings pulling power toward Paris, the Revolution wiping away the old provinces and drawing tidy departments, Napoleon and his roads and his legal code, and yes, the high-speed train that carried you down here, all of it is, in a sense, Rome's idea running again on newer hardware. When you stand in Arles you are standing at the source of a habit of mind that France has never really abandoned.

Now let me draw the line across the Atlantic, because this is where it gets interesting for an American. The people who founded the United States were soaked in Rome. But they did not look to imperial Rome, the Rome of Constantine and the emperors and the amphitheater spectacles. They looked backward, past all of that, to the Roman Republic, the Rome that existed before the Caesars, and they consciously tried to revive it. They built a Senate and called it that. They put their legislature on a hill and named it the Capitol, after the Capitoline of Rome. They told each other the story of Cincinnatus, the Roman farmer who took absolute power to save the state and then, astonishingly, gave it back and returned to his plow, and they saw George Washington as exactly that man when he resigned his commission and went home to Mount Vernon. So here is the quiet irony you can stand inside in Arles. This is a monument of imperial Rome, the Rome of one-man rule and bread and circuses, the very thing the Roman Republic had died to become. And the republic that Americans imagined they were reviving was the thing that came before this, the thing whose collapse produced this. You are standing in the answer to a question the founders were trying to reopen: can a free republic hold, or does it always slide toward the strongman and the spectacle? They bet it could hold. Arles is a two-thousand-year-old reminder of how the last people to try it ended up.

Let me bring it back down to the ground, and to your kitchen, because there is a food thread running through all of this too. The Romans brought with them what historians sometimes call the Mediterranean triad: wheat, wine, and olive oil. That is not a decoration on the history; it is the history. Those three things were the base of the Roman diet and the Roman economy, and they are still the base of how Provence eats today. The olive oil you will taste on everything here, the bread, the wine that comes with lunch as a matter of course, the tomatoes and garlic and wild herbs layered on top, this is a cuisine with Roman bones, closely related to the Italian cooking you already love. When you cook Provençal food at home you are, in a real and traceable sense, cooking downstream from Rome.

Which brings us back to that amphitheater, and to the deepest theme of this whole trip. Empires rise and fall. Rome fell. The emperors who bathed in those ruined baths are gone, and their empire is a memory you buy a ticket to visit. But notice what actually survived. Not the power. The everyday. The stone oval still fills with people on a summer night. The Saturday market still spreads through these streets, olives and cheese and fish and the same trinity of oil and wheat and wine, the way it has, more or less, for two thousand years. That is the thing I would have you carry out of Arles. Legitimacy, power, empire, all of it rests on what people believe and how long they keep believing it. But the market opens on Saturday regardless. The everyday outlasts them all.
