---
title: Arles on Foot
place: Arles
themes: endurance-of-everyday-life, centralized-power, layered-city, art-and-place, church-and-state, regionalism
words: ~3300
voice-notes: numbers spelled for the ear; a walking tour with cardinal directions throughout; self-contained — deliberately re-tells stories from 0700 (Arles as Rome) and 0800 (Van Gogh's Yellow) so the listener needs nothing else while walking
map: Les Arènes (amphitheater) | 43.677755,4.631386
map: Place du Forum (café terrace) | 43.677659,4.626958
map: Thermes de Constantin (baths) | 43.678987,4.627497
map: Place de la République & Cryptoporticus | 43.677055,4.626526
map: Espace Van Gogh (Hôtel-Dieu) | 43.675722,4.625504
---
This one is a walk. Put your comfortable shoes on, because we are going to make a loop through the old town of Arles, six stops, maybe a mile and a half all told, and the whole point is to do it on foot, slowly, letting the city change under your feet. Arles is small. You can cross the historic core in fifteen minutes if you are only trying to get somewhere. But we are not trying to get anywhere. We are trying to read the town the way you read a page, and the thing about Arles is that it has been written on, erased, and written over so many times that the page is nearly black with ink. Roman, medieval, Renaissance, the age of Van Gogh, and now. All of it is here at once, stacked and jumbled, and the walk is really a way of feeling the layers. I am going to tell you the whole story as we go, so you do not need anything but this and your own two feet. Where I point you, I will use the compass, north and south and east and west, because the streets of Arles curl and fold and will happily turn you around, and the one thing that stays honest here is the sun and the river. The river, the Rhône, runs along the western and northern edge of the old town. Keep that in the back of your mind and you will never be truly lost.

Start high, at the northeastern top of the old town, at the amphitheater, the thing the locals call the Arènes. Start here because everything else on our walk is downhill and to the south and west of it, and because this is where Arles has always come together. Stand at the foot of it first and just let the size settle on you before you say anything clever. Two tiers of arches, more than a hundred of them, a great stone oval built in the last years of the first century, around ninety in the common era, when Rome was near the height of its confidence. It held something like twenty thousand people, roaring, for gladiators and wild-animal hunts and the executions Rome liked to stage as public theater.

Now, why is there a monument like this in a modest town on the Rhône at all? That is a story worth telling in full, because it is the story of how Arles got rich enough to build in stone. It turns on one of the great gambles of ancient history. In the year forty-nine before the common era, Julius Caesar crossed the Rubicon and plunged Rome into civil war against his rival Pompey. Down here in the south, the old and wealthy Greek city of Massalia, which is now Marseille, made its choice: it backed Pompey. Arles, then called Arelate, backed Caesar. And Arelate did more than cheer from the sidelines. Its shipyards built twelve warships for Caesar's siege of Massalia, and built them, the sources say, in about a month. Caesar won that siege, and he won the war, and when the accounts were finally settled Massalia was stripped of much of its wealth and territory, and a good deal of it was handed to the loyal town upriver. A few years later Caesar planted a colony of army veterans here, hard men of the Sixth Legion, and Arelate became a proper Roman colonia, a Roman city with Roman citizens and Roman law and Roman ambition. That is the lesson sitting under all this stone, and it is as modern as it is ancient: in the Roman world, as in ours, backing the right patron at the right moment could remake a town's fortunes for centuries. Arles bet on Caesar and it collected for the next four hundred years, and this amphitheater is part of what it bought with the winnings.

Here is the thing that makes Arles different from an ordinary ruin, and it is the reason I brought you here first. It is not a ruin. When the Western Empire fell apart in the fifth century and the roads grew dangerous, the people of Arles did something ingenious and a little desperate. They moved inside the amphitheater. They walled up the arches, they raised watchtowers, and they built a town in there, a warren of more than two hundred houses packed into the arena and the galleries, with two chapels and a little public square right in the middle where gladiators had once died. It became a fortress and a refuge, a stone island the townsfolk could pull up behind them when the Saracen raiders came through in the ninth century. They gave it its own name. They called it La Cité Arénoise, the arena city, and it kept its own life, its own governance, for a thousand years. Think about that the next time you hear the word "ruin." For most of its existence this building was not a monument to the past; it was somebody's cramped, smoky, crowded home.

And then, in the eighteen hundreds, it was rescued, and the rescue tells you something about how nations decide what to treasure. A writer named Prosper Mérimée, who was France's first real inspector of historic monuments, came through in eighteen twenty-five and saw, under the medieval clutter, the Roman bones. Beginning the next year the state expropriated and cleared away all two hundred of those houses and both chapels, evicting the families who had lived there for generations, to liberate the ancient arena underneath. It is a genuinely double-edged story, and I will flag that as my own reading rather than settled fact: to make the Roman monument visible, France had to erase a living medieval neighborhood, one heritage sacrificed for an older and more prestigious one. But notice what they chose not to destroy. They spared three of the medieval towers, and they still stand today, square and blunt against the Roman curves, so that the building wears both of its lives at once. And in eighteen thirty, to inaugurate the cleared arena, the town held a bull race, timed to celebrate the French conquest of Algiers, which was unfolding that very summer. So the modern life of this arena began, fittingly, with a spectacle wrapped around an act of empire. Two thousand years on, the town still gathers where the Romans built it to gather. In summer you can buy a ticket and sit on that ancient stone for a bullfight during the Feria, or a concert, or a play. Climb one of those surviving medieval towers now, before we go down, and take the long look, because you will not get a better one. From up there you can see the whole shape of our walk: the pack of pale houses with their faded terra-cotta roofs falling away to the south and west, the Rhône flashing beyond, the flat Camargue haze past that. Fix it in your eye. Then we go down.

Coming out of the Arènes and heading downhill to the southwest, the streets close around you at once, and this is the first real pleasure of walking Arles. The lanes here are narrow and crooked and shaded, built for donkeys and shadow, not for cars, laid out on no grid you can see. That crookedness is itself a piece of history, and your feet are reading it even if your eyes miss it. The dead-straight Roman street plan is still down there, buried under the pavement; what you are actually walking on is the medieval town, which grew back organically after Rome receded, curling in on itself for protection, ignoring the old right angles. So in the first two minutes of the descent you are quite literally walking the Middle Ages laid down on top of Rome. Let yourself drift a little. It is a small town wrapped by a river; you cannot go badly wrong as long as you keep working generally downhill and to the west, and the wrong turns are half the reward, a sudden tiny square, a fig tree leaning over a wall, a doorway with a carved Roman stone reused in its lintel, because why quarry new stone when the ancients left so much of it lying around for the taking.

Keep bearing west and downhill and the lanes will spill you out into the Place du Forum, and the town opens up and exhales. This is the social heart of Arles, a handsome square shaded by big plane trees, cafés spreading their tables out under the leaves, and it has been the center of gravity of this town for more than two thousand years, because this is exactly where the Roman forum stood, the civic and religious core of the ancient city, the place a Roman came to do business and hear the news and be seen. Look at the northwest corner of the square, at the front of the hotel there, and you will see two weathered Roman columns and a broken fragment of pediment jammed straight into the building's face, orphaned, holding up nothing, just standing in the wall. Those are the last above-ground bones of the Roman forum, swallowed into a later building the way this whole town swallows its own past, not preserving it behind glass but simply building through it and carrying on.

There are two people I want you to meet on this square, one in bronze and one who is only a memory now. The bronze one stands right here: a statue of Frédéric Mistral, a great bearded man in a frock coat. Mistral was a poet, and in nineteen hundred and four he won the Nobel Prize in Literature, and he won it for writing not in French but in Provençal, the old language of this region, the tongue people actually spoke in these streets before Paris and its schools slowly stamped it out. He spent his life and eventually his Nobel money trying to save Provençal culture from disappearing, founding a museum of it just a few streets from here. Hold onto him, because he is a small perfect emblem of one of the great tensions running under this whole trip: the pull between the center and the region, between the single official France that Paris built and the older, stubborn, local France of particular languages and particular foods that refuses to quite dissolve. Mistral stands in the middle of the café square with his back very much to Paris.

The other person you meet here came on a warm September night in eighteen eighty-eight, set up an easel on this square, and painted the terrace of a café glowing gold under a sky crowded with stars. His name was Vincent van Gogh, and the painting is Café Terrace at Night, and here is the lovely part: the café is still on the eastern side of the square, still doing business. It has been repainted yellow and rebranded, frankly, to look like the picture and to sell coffee to people like us, so what you are looking at is a real corner of a real town gamely performing its own most famous portrait. Enjoy it anyway. Sit down under the planes. Have a coffee, or something colder. You have earned it two minutes into the walk, which happens to be exactly the right pace for this town. And while you sit, let me tell you the rest of Van Gogh's Arles story, because it does not end on this happy square, and we are going to walk straight into where it ends before this loop is over. He came down here from Paris in February of eighteen eighty-eight, a thirty-four-year-old Dutchman, a former art dealer and failed preacher, chasing the southern light the way some people chase love. And the light delivered. In roughly fifteen months here he made more than two hundred paintings, a finished canvas every couple of days, the sunflowers, the yellow house he rented, his own plain bedroom, this café. He dreamed of founding a whole brotherhood of painters in the south, and he got exactly one recruit, Paul Gauguin, who came to stay that autumn. Hold that thread. We will pick it up at our last stop, because it snapped, badly, only a few streets from where you are sitting.

When you are ready to move, leave the Place du Forum from its northwestern side and let the streets tip you downhill toward the river, roughly to the west and north. It is a short walk, three or four minutes, and you will feel the ground falling away under you as you go, because the Rhône is the low edge of the town and everything drains toward it. Keep heading down and west until you come out near the Rue du Grand Prieuré, and there, half sunk below the level of the modern street, you will find our third stop, the Baths of Constantine, the Thermes de Constantin. Go down the steps into them. After the sunlit café square this is a quieter, cooler, stranger pleasure.

What survives is only a fragment, but a magnificent one: the great curved apse of the hot room, the caldarium, a half-dome of alternating bands of brick and pale stone, rising over a floor that is held up on dozens of little stacked brick pillars. Those pillars are the whole point, so look hard at them. This is a hypocaust, the Roman central-heating system, and the floor you are looking at was a false floor, lifted up on those stacks of tile so that hot air from a wood furnace could flow underneath it and up through hollow channels in the walls, heating the whole room from below the bathers' feet. It is genuinely brilliant engineering, warm marble floors in the fourth century, and it is worth understanding why so much of it was built here, on this spot, because it points to the highest moment in this town's entire ancient history.

That name, Constantine, is the key. Constantine the Great was the emperor who did two enormous things: he reunited the Roman Empire under one ruler, and he turned it, for the first time, toward Christianity. And in the early fourth century he made Arles something close to a second capital of the West, an imperial residence, a place he actually lived and governed from. His son, the future emperor Constantine the Second, was born right here in Arles in the year three hundred sixteen. These baths were part of the palace complex worthy of an emperor's stay. But the deepest thing that happened here is not architectural, it is a hinge in the history of the West, and it lands squarely on one of the themes I keep circling on this trip: the long entanglement of church and state. In the year three hundred fourteen, Constantine summoned bishops from across the Western Empire, from Gaul and Spain and Italy and even from distant Britain, to gather here in Arles for a great church council. It was one of the first times the Roman state and the Christian church sat down formally together to hammer out doctrine and discipline as partners. Stand in these baths and picture it: an emperor who has just legalized a once-persecuted faith, convening its bishops in his own provincial capital, beginning the fusion of throne and altar that would shape Europe for the next fifteen hundred years. When France centuries later fights its bitter fights over the place of the Church, when it eventually builds its wall of laïcité, its strict separation of church and state, and when the young United States makes its own very different bargain, its disestablishment, its First Amendment promising Congress will make no law respecting an establishment of religion, both of them are answering a question that has one of its early chapters right here, in a sunken ruin by the Rhône, where an emperor once called the bishops to order. Picture the false floor restored and the furnace roaring and the hot room thick with steam and important men arguing, and you have the measure of what this modest little town once was.

Now climb back up out of the baths and turn away from the river, inland, back to the east and south, up the gentle slope you just came down. Two or three minutes will bring you to the Place de la République, the grand central square of the town, and this is our fourth stop. Stand in the middle of it for a moment before we go underground, because there is one more layer here right out in the open. In the center of the square rises a tall stone obelisk. It looks Egyptian, and it is Egyptian in style, but it was carved from a single block of granite in Roman times, and it originally stood on the central spine of the Roman circus, the chariot-racing track, out at the edge of town, most likely raised under Constantine's dynasty. When the circus was abandoned and the races stopped, the obelisk toppled and broke in two and lay in the mud for a thousand years, until the townspeople dug it up and, in the sixteen hundreds, hauled it here and set it upright again in front of their town hall as a monument to royal glory. So even the thing standing proudly in the middle of the modern square is a recycled Roman fragment, dragged from one age into the next. Nothing in Arles is ever thrown away; it is only repurposed.

And now for the stop almost nobody expects, the one that turns the whole day on its head. Walk to the town hall, the Hôtel de Ville, on the northern side of the square, and go inside, because underneath it, some six meters straight down, is the strangest and most moving space in Arles: the Cryptoporticus. You buy a ticket and you descend, and the temperature drops, and the light goes dim and green, and you find yourself in a vast underground horseshoe of stone galleries, a double aisle of low arches marching off into the gloom in three directions, cool and damp and silent, running directly beneath the square where you were just squinting at the obelisk in the sun.

Here is what this place actually is, and it is one of my favorite facts in the whole town. The Cryptoporticus is not a crypt, and it was never meant to be seen at all. It is the foundation of the Roman forum, the hidden underside of that café square we started from. The Romans wanted to put their grand civic forum up on a high, flat, monumental level, but the ground here sloped, so rather than truck in mountains of rubble to build it up, they did something more elegant: they built this enormous vaulted undercroft, this deliberate artificial cellar, and let it carry the weight of the square above, level and true. What you are walking through, down in the cool dark, is the pure engineering that made the sunlit forum above it possible. And there is a detail here that stops me cold every time. The masons' marks chiseled into these stones are Greek. The men who cut and set this foundation, around thirty years before the common era, were very likely Greek craftsmen from Massalia, from Marseille, from the very city that Arles had just helped Julius Caesar defeat and humble. The losers' own stonemasons, laying the foundation of the winners' triumphant new forum. That is the entire Roman story compressed into one damp basement.

Stand down there a moment in the quiet and let it land, because it connects to something I keep coming back to. We look at Rome and we see the monuments, the amphitheater, the theater, the grand square, the obelisk, the things built to impress. But a civilization is mostly made of what it builds where no one will ever look. The forum up top was the show; this Cryptoporticus was the truth underneath it, the unglamorous, load-bearing, invisible work that held the show up. Every impressive thing rests on something like this, some patient hidden structure that no one applauds. And here is the part that gets me: it outlasted the very thing it was built to carry. The magnificent forum above is gone, scavenged for its stone over the centuries, remembered now only by two orphaned columns stuck in a hotel wall. The humble foundation survives nearly whole, because nobody ever bothered to loot a basement. There is a lesson buried down there about what endures and what does not, and it is not the lesson the Romans thought they were teaching. One more human note before we climb out: in later centuries part of these galleries, the stretch under the town hall, was used as a prison. So people have been shut up down here in the cold and the dark, which is a fittingly grim thought to carry back up toward the last thing I want to show you, because our final stop is also, in its way, a place of confinement.

Come back up into the daylight and let your eyes adjust. Now we walk to the sixth and last stop, and the whole mood of the walk changes one final time, from stone to garden, from Rome to a single suffering human being. Leave the Place de la République from its southern side and take the quieter streets to the south and west; it is a short, easy walk of a few minutes, and the town grows plainer and more residential as you go, ordinary shutters, ordinary doorways. You are aiming for a small square called the Place du Docteur Félix Rey, and hold that name a second, Doctor Félix Rey, because he is about to walk into the story. When you reach it you come to a place called the Espace Van Gogh. It does not look like much from the street, just another doorway, and then you step through it into a cloistered courtyard and you stop, because you recognize it. A square garden ringed on all sides by a two-story arcaded gallery painted in strong yellows and other bright colors, the flowerbeds laid out in neat blocks of blazing color, a little pond and fountain in the center. You have seen this before. Van Gogh painted it, the arcades and the beds all burning with color, and the garden today has been deliberately replanted to match his canvas, so that once again you are standing bodily inside a painting, exactly as you were on the café square.

But this place carries a far heavier weight than that café did, and now I can finally tell you why, and close the thread I left dangling on the Place du Forum. This was the town hospital, the Hôtel-Dieu, and this is where they brought Van Gogh on the morning after the most infamous night in the history of art. Remember Gauguin, the one painter who came to join his brotherhood of the south. Through that autumn the two of them, two difficult and intense men in one small yellow house, argued about everything, about art and money and how to live, and it curdled. On the night of the twenty-third of December, eighteen eighty-eight, something in Vincent broke. In some kind of psychotic crisis he took a razor and cut off part of his own left ear. And then, bleeding, he wrapped the piece of ear in paper, walked to a brothel he frequented, asked for a young woman there, and handed it to her with the words, keep this object carefully. Then he went home and collapsed. The police found him the next morning barely alive and rushed him here, to this hospital, where a young doctor on duty, Félix Rey, the very man this square is now named for, stopped the bleeding and saved his life. And in the following months, when the frightened citizens of Arles circulated a petition, some thirty of his neighbors signing it, demanding that this dangerous madman be locked away, it was to this building that he was confined. So this gentle courtyard was, for Vincent, the place of his rescue and the place of his imprisonment both.

And here is the thing that turns the whole walk on its hinge. It was here, shut inside this building, recovering and confined and looking out at this exact courtyard, that he painted it, in the spring of eighteen eighty-nine. He took the site of his breakdown and his captivity and he made it into one of his gentlest, most orderly, most radiantly hopeful pictures, all that calm bright geometry of flowerbeds and arcades imposed by sheer will on the place of his worst suffering. Knowing that, this garden stops being merely pretty. It becomes something close to heroic. A man in pieces, painting the world back into order. He would leave the south not long after, commit himself to an asylum up the road, and die by his own hand in the summer of eighteen ninety, at thirty-seven, believing himself a total failure, having sold, as far as we know for certain, a single painting in his whole life. And within a century his work would become some of the most valuable objects human beings own. What did he paint to get there? Not gods and not kings. A chair, a bedroom, sunflowers in a jug, a café on a square, and this hospital courtyard where a stranger named Félix Rey once saved his life.

And there is one last layer here, the kind Arles specializes in, where nothing is ever only one thing. This building has since been made over into a cultural center, with shops and a public library and exhibition rooms wrapped around that same courtyard, busy, ordinary, full of people going about an ordinary Tuesday in the place of Vincent's agony, exactly the way life goes on inside the ancient amphitheater and on the old forum square. And that is the note I want to leave you on, because by now you have felt it in your legs and not just heard it. In an hour and a half of walking you have passed through Roman imperial spectacle, the story of a town that gambled on Caesar and won, a fortress-village that lived a thousand years inside an arena, a café square still doing the same job it did two thousand years ago, the sunken baths where an emperor summoned the bishops and bent the future of church and state, an obelisk dug out of the mud and stood back up, the hidden foundation that quietly held a whole city on its shoulders, and finally the courtyard where a broken painter made beauty out of ruin. And the through-line underneath all of it, the thing your feet have been spelling out on these crooked stones, is that Arles does not choose between its layers. It lives in all of them at once. The Romans built the ground; the medievals curled their lanes on top of it; the kings dragged the obelisk back upright; Van Gogh saw the light that falls on all of it; and right now, this very hour, someone is drinking a coffee on the forum and shelving a book in the hospital and, come summer, watching a bullfight in the arena, all at the same time, all stacked on top of one another. The emperors and the kings and even the tormented genius are all gone. The town they left behind is still, quietly, stubbornly, insistently open for business. Walk it slowly. That is the only way it will give up what it knows.
