---
title: Van Gogh's Yellow
place: Arles
themes: art-and-place, endurance-of-everyday-life
words: ~1300
---
You have come to Arles for a lot of reasons, but let us be honest about the one under all the others. You came for the yellow. And the remarkable thing, standing here, is that the yellow is real. It is not something Vincent van Gogh invented in his head and imposed on this town. It is in the light. Provence has a particular quality of southern sun, hard and clear and almost mineral, the same light that pulled painters south for a century, and when it falls on the stone and the wheat and the plane trees, the world really does go gold. Van Gogh did not make that up. He just saw it more fiercely than the rest of us, and then he found a way to put it on canvas.

He arrived in February of eighteen eighty-eight, stepping off a train from Paris into snow, of all things. He was thirty-four, a Dutchman, a former art dealer and a failed preacher, and he had spent his early years painting dark, earthy pictures of peasants and potatoes, the palette of a northern winter. Then he had gone to Paris, where his brother Theo, who supported him financially for most of his adult life, introduced him to the Impressionists, and their bright broken color began to work on him. But Paris was crowded and gray and full of other painters' opinions, and Vincent wanted the sun. So he came down here, to this old Roman town on the Rhône, chasing light the way some people chase love.

What happened next is one of the great creative explosions in the history of art. In roughly fifteen months in Arles, he made more than two hundred paintings. Sit with that number. That is a finished canvas every couple of days, for over a year, and not minor ones. This is where the blazing yellow arrives. He painted a little house he rented on a corner and called it, simply, The Yellow House. He painted sunflowers in a vase, again and again, working out how many shades of yellow could sit against each other and still sing. He painted his own bedroom, a plain room with a plain bed and two chairs, and made it feel like a held breath. And one warm September night he set up his easel on the Place du Forum, the square you can walk to in about five minutes from where your boat is tied up, and painted the terrace of a café glowing gold under a sky full of stars. That painting is Café Terrace at Night, and here is a lovely fact for you: the café is still there. The building he painted still stands on that square, and people still sit out under it in the evening. Now, a word of honesty, because I promised you no fairy tales. The building is real, but it has been repainted and rebranded over the years to match the picture, so what you are looking at is a place performing its own most famous portrait. Enjoy it anyway. It is a real corner of a real town where a real man really stood.

And here is a fact worth carrying with you, because you are on the Rhône right now: one of those Arles nights, Van Gogh set up on the riverbank and painted the town's gaslights reflected in the moving water under a swirl of stars. That is Starry Night Over the Rhône, eighteen eighty-eight, painted on this river. Now, I want to be careful here, because two paintings get tangled up all the time. The world-famous Starry Night, the one with the cypress and the rolling, churning sky that hangs in the Museum of Modern Art in New York, is a different picture, painted later, in eighteen eighty-nine, after he had left Arles. So there are two starry nights. The one born on your river is the earlier, quieter one. Hold onto that distinction; almost everyone conflates them.

It is worth saying clearly what kind of painter he was, because the labels matter. Van Gogh is not an Impressionist. He is a Post-Impressionist, and the difference is not just chronology. The Impressionists, Monet and the rest, were largely trying to catch how the eye actually perceives light and color in a fleeting moment, the truth of the retina. Van Gogh took their bright liberated color and pushed it somewhere else entirely. He was not trying to record how the wheat field looked. He was trying to paint how it felt, using color as raw emotion, laying it on thick, letting the brushstroke itself carry the feeling. The Impressionists opened the door; Van Gogh and his generation walked through it into something more personal, more expressive, more interior. And it was Provence, this clarity, this light, that let him do it. The southern sun gave him permission to turn the color all the way up.

The dream behind it all was tender and a little doomed. He wanted the Yellow House to become the heart of an artists' colony, a brotherhood of painters working together in the south. He got exactly one recruit: Paul Gauguin, who came to stay in the autumn of eighteen eighty-eight. For a few weeks it was electric, two strong painters side by side. Then it curdled. They argued constantly, about art, about everything, two difficult men in a small yellow house. And it ended on the night of December twenty-third, eighteen eighty-eight, with the episode everyone knows and almost no one knows accurately. Van Gogh, in some kind of breakdown, cut off part of his own left ear. Now I have to flag this, because the details are genuinely disputed. The traditional story is that he did it to himself with a razor after a fight. One later theory, not widely accepted by the major scholars, holds that Gauguin, a skilled fencer, may have wounded him. Even how much of the ear he cut is uncertain, part of it or most of it. What is not in dispute is that a brotherhood of painters ended that night in blood, and that Van Gogh was never quite the same.

The following spring, in May of eighteen eighty-nine, he did something clear-eyed and brave: he voluntarily committed himself to an asylum at Saint-Rémy, just up the road from here, where he kept painting, including that famous swirling Starry Night. He left the south, went north to a village near Paris, and in the summer of eighteen ninety he died of a gunshot wound, almost certainly self-inflicted, at thirty-seven. He believed, at the end, that he had failed. He had sold, as far as we know for certain, a single painting in his entire life.

Which brings us to the thing I most want you to feel walking these streets. In eighteen eighty-seven he was a penniless man who thought himself a failure. In nineteen eighty-seven, one century later almost to the year, one of his Sunflowers sold at auction for nearly forty million dollars, more than triple the record for any painting to that point, and his work has only climbed since. The man who could not give his pictures away made objects that are now among the most valuable things human beings own. And what did he paint to get there? Not gods, not kings. A chair. A bedroom. Sunflowers in a jug. A café on a square. The plainest furniture of an ordinary life, seen so hard that it became eternal. That is the whole thing, really, the endurance of the everyday, and it is why this town is a pilgrimage.

One last honest note, so you are not disappointed. Almost none of his actual paintings are here in Arles. They are scattered across the great museums of the world. His Bedroom is in several versions in Chicago, Paris, Amsterdam. That plain chair he painted hangs in London. Starry Night Over the Rhône is in Paris. The Fondation Vincent van Gogh here in Arles is a wonderful place, but it holds no permanent hoard of his masterpieces; it mounts changing exhibitions, usually with a genuine Van Gogh or two among work by artists he inspired. So do not come looking for a treasure room. Come looking for the light. That is the one thing that never left. Stand on the Place du Forum at dusk, or on the riverbank as the lamps come on over the Rhône, and you are standing inside the painting. The canvases went to New York and London and Tokyo. The yellow stayed home.
