---
title: Les Alyscamps and the Bones of the Dead
place: Arles
themes: church-vs-state, absolutist-absorption, endurance-of-everyday-life
words: ~1300
---

Walk out past the edge of the old town of Arles, away from the amphitheater and the cafés, and you come to a place that feels like it belongs to a different order of time. It is called Les Alyscamps, and the first thing you meet is a long, straight lane, shaded by tall poplars, and lined on both sides with stone coffins. Sarcophagi, dozens of them, set on the ground like benches, most of them lidless, most of them empty. At the far end, half in ruin, stands a church, Saint-Honorat, its tower rising out of the trees. It is quiet in a way that ordinary cemeteries are not, because almost no one buried here is remembered, and yet the whole avenue is arranged, still, to be walked as a procession. You are meant to move slowly down it. So let us do that, and let me tell you what ground you are actually standing on, because this lane is one of the great palimpsests of Europe, a place written over and over by two thousand years of people trying to answer the same question, what do we owe our dead.

Start with the name, because it is a small marvel in itself. Les Alyscamps comes from the Occitan, the old language of the south of France, Aliscamps, and that in turn comes from the Latin Elisii Campi, the Elysian Fields. In French that phrase is the Champs-Élysées, the very same name as the grand avenue in Paris. So the celebrated boulevard you may picture, with its shops and its lights, and this silent lane of coffins in Arles, are namesakes. Both are named for the Elysian Fields, the paradise of the virtuous dead in Greek and Roman belief, the place where the good souls went. That is a documented etymology, not a legend. And it tells you how the Romans thought about this spot. This was a road of the blessed dead.

And it was, first, a Roman road in the most literal sense. This is a fact worth sitting with, because it explains everything that came after. Roman cities did not bury their dead inside the walls. Burial within the city was forbidden, by custom and by law, so the dead were laid to rest outside the gates, along the roads leading into town. If you have walked the Appian Way outside Rome, you have seen the same idea, tombs lining the highway so that every traveler entering the city passed first through the company of the dead. Les Alyscamps was exactly this, the final stretch of a Roman road approaching Arles, and the well-to-do of the city bought their plots along it, from simple stone boxes to elaborate monuments. It was Arles's main burial ground for something close to fifteen hundred years. That is the pagan Roman foundation of this place. A roadside, outside the walls, for the honored dead.

Now here is the turn that I find genuinely astonishing, and it is where one of the big ideas of this whole series comes into focus. When Christianity arrived, it did not bulldoze this pagan necropolis and start fresh somewhere holy. It moved in. It absorbed the place. And the hinge of that absorption was a man named Genesius, in French Genès, Saint Genesius of Arles. Let me be careful here and separate what is reasonably historical from what is pious legend, because there is a lot of both. The oldest accounts describe Genesius as a young notary, a legal clerk in the service of the Roman magistrate here in Arles, and as a catechumen, someone preparing for baptism but not yet baptized. Around the year three hundred and three, during the last great persecution, the imperial decree ordering the persecution of Christians was read out in his presence. And he refused to write it down. He threw down his tablets and fled. He was caught, and he was executed. The early tradition has a piercing detail, that because he died before he could be baptized in water, he was said to be baptized in his own blood. That much is old and reasonably firm. The later embellishments, the miracles, the exact manner of his death, those grew in the telling over centuries, so hold them loosely.

But the effect was enormous. Genesius was buried out here, along the road, and his grave became the focus of a cult. And once a martyr's bones were in the ground, the ground itself became holy, and every Christian in the region wanted to be buried near him, close to the saint, in the hope that his holiness would somehow extend to them on the day of resurrection. This is the pattern I keep returning to. A new authority, the Church, does not destroy the old world of Rome, it inherits it and repurposes it. The Roman road of the pagan dead becomes the most prestigious Christian burial ground in the whole of medieval Europe. The Romans had already made this a place of the honored dead, and Christianity simply poured new meaning into a vessel that was already there. You can see this literally in the stone. Many of the sarcophagi here were Roman work, and it was common practice in late antiquity to take a pagan carved coffin and recut it, or reuse it, with Christian imagery, the good shepherd, scenes from scripture. The same marble, a new story carved on top. That is absorption made visible, and I would ask you to look for it as you walk, though I will flag that telling exactly which carvings are reused and which are original is a specialist's job, and the finest examples have been moved indoors to museums for safekeeping.

So desirable did this ground become that we reach one of the famous stories of the place, and here I want to flag the uncertainty honestly. It is widely repeated that in the Middle Ages, people who died up and down the valley arranged to have their bodies sent to Arles for burial here, floated down the river Rhône, and that the boatmen of the Rhône made a good living ferrying coffins downstream to this final harbor. You will hear this told with great confidence. The demand for burial here was certainly real and enormous, the sarcophagi were genuinely stacked several layers deep, and the river was the highway of the age. But the vivid image of coffins drifting down the Rhône with a coin for the boatman has the shape of a tradition as much as a documented fact, so enjoy it, but hold it a little lightly.

The prestige faded, as these things do. In eleven fifty-two the relics of another local saint, Trophimus, were moved from here into the cathedral in the town, and with the holiness relocated, the pull of Les Alyscamps waned. In later centuries the place was quarried and looted, sarcophagi handed out as gifts to visiting dignitaries, funeral stones carted off as building material. What you walk today is the beautiful, melancholy remnant of something once far grander.

And then, in the autumn of eighteen eighty-eight, two men came out here with their easels. Vincent van Gogh and Paul Gauguin, in the brief and combustible weeks they spent together in Arles, both chose Les Alyscamps as a subject, and their canvases of this poplar-lined avenue survive. So the ground that held the Roman dead, and then the Christian dead, also holds a chapter of the history of modern art, two of its most famous hands turned toward this same walk you are on.

Here is the reflection I would leave you with, standing among the empty coffins under the poplars. How a civilization treats its dead is one of the truest measurements of what it actually believes. The Romans believed in the Elysian Fields and lined a road with the blessed. The Christians believed in resurrection and the intercession of saints and crowded in close to holy bones. We, the tourists walking here today, mostly no longer share either belief, and yet look at us, still moving slowly and quietly down a lane arranged for a procession, still lowering our voices, still unwilling to treat these stones as merely stones. The specific creeds change and change and change. What endures, on this exact ground, older than Rome and outlasting the Church, is the simple, stubborn human refusal to let the dead be nothing.
