---
title: The City of Popes
place: Avignon
themes: church-vs-state, legitimacy, absolutist-absorption
words: ~1300
voice-notes: numbers and years spelled for the ear
---
Stand in front of the Palais des Papes and let your eye climb the walls, and the first thing to tell you is that this is the wrong shape for a church. There is no soaring facade begging you to look up toward heaven, no rose window, no welcoming porch. What you are looking at is the largest Gothic palace in Europe, and it reads as what it truly was — a fortress. Blank stone cliffs of it, towers, walls thick enough to stop an army, arrow slits where you might expect stained glass. If a cathedral is a building that says come in and kneel, this building says keep out. And that single architectural fact is the doorway into one of the strangest and most revealing episodes in the whole history of Europe, because these popes did not build like shepherds of souls. They built like princes. They built like men who expected to be besieged, and who intended to win.

Here is how the popes came to Avignon in the first place, and I want you to notice from the start that it is a story about a king. For most of the Middle Ages the great unresolved contest of European life was the struggle between the two swords — the spiritual authority of the Church and the temporal power of kings and emperors. Who outranked whom? Could a pope depose a king? Could a king bend a pope? At the turn of the fourteenth century that fight came to a head between a fierce, absolutist pope named Boniface the Eighth and an equally hard French king, Philip the Fourth, called Philip the Fair — fair meaning handsome, not just. Philip wanted to tax the clergy of France to pay for his wars. Boniface forbade it, and issued grand declarations that every human creature was subject to the pope of Rome. Philip's answer was to send men to arrest the pope. The old man was seized, roughed up, and though he was freed, he died within weeks, broken. That is the raw fact worth holding onto: a king of France laid hands on a pope, and the pope did not survive it.

What followed looks, from a distance, like the French crown quietly pocketing the papacy itself. In thirteen-oh-five a Frenchman was elected pope and took the name Clement the Fifth. He never went to Rome. Instead, in thirteen-oh-nine, he settled his court at Avignon, on the edge of French power, and there the papacy stayed for the better part of seventy years. Seven popes in a row reigned from Avignon, from thirteen-oh-nine to thirteen seventy-seven, and every one of them was French. The court grew fabulously rich and fabulously bureaucratic. And to the rest of Europe — to the Italians especially, who wanted their bishop of Rome back in Rome — the whole arrangement stank. The great poet Petrarch, who knew the place, called Avignon the Babylon of the West, and from him comes the enduring insult for the whole era: the Babylonian Captivity of the Church, borrowed straight from the Old Testament, from the exile of the Jews in Babylon. The claim packed into that phrase is enormous. It says the papacy was not merely away from home. It was captive. It was a prisoner of the king of France.

Now let me flag this carefully, because it is exactly the sort of thing that hardens into legend. How captured were these popes, really? That is genuinely debated among historians. Some of the Avignon popes were serious reformers and able administrators; the papacy in this period was arguably better run than it had been in centuries, and the popes did not simply take dictation from Paris. So the honest picture is not a puppet on a string. It is something subtler and, to my mind, more interesting — the appearance of capture, the perception across Europe that the holiest office in Christendom had become an annex of one kingdom's power. And here is a theme we keep returning to on this trip: in matters of legitimacy, appearance is not a minor thing. It is very nearly the whole thing.

Which brings us to the sequel, and to the deepest idea this city has to offer. In thirteen seventy-seven the papacy finally went home to Rome. You would think that would end the trouble. Instead it produced a catastrophe that makes the point better than any lecture could. The very next year, in thirteen seventy-eight, a disputed election gave Europe two popes at once — one in Rome, one back in Avignon — each fully convinced he was the true successor of Saint Peter, each excommunicating the other, each blessing kings and damning the other's followers to hell. This is the Western Schism, and it ground on from thirteen seventy-eight to fourteen seventeen. At one point an attempt to fix it by electing a compromise candidate only made things worse, so that for a stretch there were three popes at the same time, three men each claiming to hold the keys to heaven. Europe split along the seams. France and its allies backed one man; England and much of the Empire backed the rival, largely because France backed the first. The choice of pope became a move on the chessboard of national politics.

Sit with what that means, because it is the cleanest illustration you will ever find of an idea we keep circling. A pope's authority is made of nothing but belief. He commands no great army of his own. His power to bind and loose, to save or condemn, exists entirely because a vast community of people believe he holds it. So what happens when the belief splits in two? The answer, terrifyingly, is that the office splits in two, and no force on earth can put it back together. You cannot settle it with soldiers — armies can take a city, but they cannot make a doubting Christian in Paris believe the man in Rome is the real pope. The thing was finally resolved only at a great council of the Church at Constance, which by fourteen seventeen deposed or accepted the resignations of the rival claimants and elected a single new pope, Martin the Fifth, whom everyone agreed to believe in. Notice how it was healed. Not by conquest. By the manufacture of a new consensus. Legitimacy is downstream of belief, and when belief fractures, only a restored belief can mend it.

There is an American echo here, and I offer it lightly, as a suggestion rather than a straight line. When the founders of the United States insisted so fiercely on separating church from state, they were reasoning from a long European memory of exactly this kind of wreckage — of altar and throne fused together until you could not reform the one without convulsing the other, of religious authority made into an instrument of kings and kingdoms. Keep them apart, the founders decided, and you spare yourself the Avignons and the schisms. The French, as we have seen elsewhere on this trip, drew a different and more aggressive lesson from the same history, and called it laïcité. Same wound. Two prescriptions.

Let me leave you with something to taste rather than think, because everyday life always endures underneath the grand quarrels of popes and kings. Just up the Rhône from here is a village whose wine you may already know — Châteauneuf-du-Pape, which means, quite literally, the pope's new castle. The name is no marketing flourish. It records the plain fact that the Avignon popes kept a summer residence and vineyards there, and the vines have outlasted every schism and every council. And down at the river's edge you will see the famous broken bridge, the Pont Saint-Bénézet — the very bridge of the children's song, sur le pont d'Avignon, on y danse. The Rhône knocked its arches down again and again over the centuries until the city simply gave up, and only four spans still reach out over the water toward nothing. A small, true joke to end on: the song has everyone dancing on the bridge, but the likelier truth is that they danced sous le pont, underneath it, on an island below. Even here, what everyone believes and what actually happened have quietly parted ways — which, in the city of the popes, feels exactly right.
