---
title: The Rhône as a Highway
place: The Rhône (river days)
themes: distributed-vs-centralized-power, everyday-economy, france-vs-america
words: ~1300
---
Stand at the rail for a moment and just watch the water go by. If you look closely, you will see that the river is not idling. The Rhône moves. Even here, on this broad calm reach, there is a muscle to it, a steady southward pull, and that pull is the whole story of this valley. This is one of the swiftest major rivers in Europe. It begins as meltwater off the Rhône Glacier in the Swiss Alps, gathers itself and pours through Lake Geneva, then turns and drives down through France for something over five hundred miles to the Mediterranean, fanning out at the end into the marshy delta of the Camargue below Arles, where you began. And somewhere near Lyon, where this cruise will end, it swallows its great tributary, the Saône, and doubles in force. So understand what you are actually doing this week. You are going the wrong way. You are traveling up, against all of that, toward the source. And for almost the entire history of human beings on this river, that was the hard direction, the expensive direction, the direction that broke men and animals.

Think about what it took, before engines. Going downstream was easy enough; you loaded your barge and let the current do the work, three weeks or so from Lyon down to the sea. But coming back up against that current was a different kind of labor entirely. The boats of the Rhône, the barques du Rhône, were long sailing barges, and when the wind failed, which was often, the only way north was to be dragged. This was called halage, towing, and it is one of those plain words that hides an enormous amount of human suffering. Teams of horses walked the towpaths along the bank, hauling on ropes, and where the river was fierce they were joined by men, and by more horses. The figures that come down to us are startling. To pull a train of five or six boats up the worst stretches, you might harness fifty, sixty, even eighty horses, strung out along the bank, leaning into the ropes, with men walking alongside them for weeks. Whole villages on this river lived off that trade, off the horses and the ropes and the taverns where the crews stopped. That is what the Rhône was: not a scenic backdrop, but a brutal, magnificent working machine, and the labor ran in one direction, uphill, against the water, at the pace of a walking horse.

Now here is the idea I want you to carry with you, because it reframes this entire trip. Before there were railroads, before there was a France organized around Paris, this river was the organizing line of the whole southeast. Civilization came up the Rhône. Around six hundred years before Christ, Greek sailors from the city of Phocaea, in what is now Turkey, founded a colony at the mouth of the river and called it Massalia. You know it today as Marseille. And from Massalia, Greek goods and Greek ideas, wine and olives and coined money and the alphabet, moved inland the only way they could, up the river valley, into the heart of Gaul. The Romans came the same way, and after them the popes at Avignon, and the medieval merchants who linked Arles and Avignon and Vienne and Lyon into a single chain of river towns. And that is the thing to notice, quite literally, out your window this week. Every single place this ship stops is a river town. Arles, Avignon, Viviers, Tournon, Vienne, Lyon. They are not arranged the way a modern planner would arrange them, radiating out from some capital. They arranged themselves, organically, like beads on a string, along the one line that mattered: the water. This is the older pattern, and it is worth naming plainly. This is distributed order. Power and trade and settlement strung out along a natural corridor, each town a link, no single center commanding the rest.

I want to set that deliberately against something we talked about on the train down here, the TGV, with its lines radiating out from Paris like spokes from a hub, the whole nation measured by its distance from the capital. That hub-and-spoke France, the one where to get from one provincial city to another it is often fastest to go through Paris, is a made thing, an achievement of the centralizing state over the last few centuries. But this river is what came before it, and in a sense what it replaced. For most of French history the organizing lines were not roads drawn out from a throne. They were rivers, and the Rhône was the greatest of them, the north-south spine of the country. When you sail it, you are sailing along the grain of a much older France, one that grew up along its waters rather than being administered out from its center.

Which brings us to why the ship you are on can do the impossible thing, glide upstream at a comfortable pace with nobody hauling on a rope. Watch what happens when you reach a dam. The ship noses into a concrete chamber, a lock, the gates close behind you, and then, quietly, the whole vessel begins to rise, lifted on a rising column of water, sometimes by fifty or sixty feet, until the upstream gates open and you sail out onto a higher, tamer stretch of river. That is the wild Rhône defeated. And it was defeated on purpose, by a single organization, the Compagnie Nationale du Rhône, the National Rhône Company, chartered in nineteen thirty-three. Its job was to take this violent, unnavigable, flood-prone river and turn it into three useful things at once: a staircase of locks for navigation, a chain of dams for hydroelectric power, and a defense against flooding for the towns along the banks. Over the decades that followed they built it out, dam after dam, lock after lock, until the river that once needed eighty horses to climb could be climbed by anyone with a ticket.

And here is where I want to draw the line across the Atlantic, the way we keep doing on this trip, because the timing is almost uncanny. That National Rhône Company was chartered in the last week of May, nineteen thirty-three. In that very same month, on the other side of the ocean, Franklin Roosevelt signed the act creating the Tennessee Valley Authority, the great American experiment in taming a whole river system for power and flood control and navigation. And that summer, out in Washington State, they broke ground on the Grand Coulee Dam on the Columbia, with the Bonneville Dam to follow the next year. Two nations, in the same season of the same year, in the depths of the same global depression, reached for the same idea: that the modern state should take a wild river in hand and bend it to human purposes. Now here is where I have to flag that this next part is my interpretation, not settled fact. I would read the National Rhône Company as one more expression of the French centralizing impulse, the same reflex that built Versailles and the TGV, now turned on nature itself, the state absorbing the river the way an absolutist king absorbed his rival nobles. And I would read the American dams as a genuine cousin, but a telling one, because in America even this had to be done by carving out special federal authorities, workarounds in a system built to distrust exactly that kind of central power. Same impulse, two very different constitutional settlements. Draw your own conclusion.

One last thing to look for as you rise through the locks. Up on the slopes, especially as you move north, you will start to see vineyards, the terraced Côtes du Rhône, the wines we will talk about properly in the days ahead. Ask yourself why they are here, on these particular hillsides. And the answer is the same answer as everything else on this river. Sun on a south-facing slope, good drainage, and, crucially, a corridor, a highway of water that for twenty-six centuries could carry what those slopes produced to a waiting world. The grapes are here because the river is here. Everything is here because the river is here. Enjoy the climb.
