---
title: Tournon by Evening Light
place: Tournon-sur-Rhône (evening arrival walk)
themes: distributed-power, endurance-of-everyday-life, france-vs-america
words: ~1300
voice-notes: French place-names routed on first mention; keep the walk physical and paced for dusk
---
Step off the boat and give yourself a moment before you go anywhere. The light at this hour does something particular here. <fw lang="fr">Tournon</fw> sits low against the western bank, and behind it the hills of the <fw lang="fr">Ardèche</fw> rise almost at once, so as the sun drops the whole town goes gold and then rose and then a kind of deep blue-gray, and the granite of the old castle above the rooftops holds the last of it longest. Across the water, the far bank at <fw lang="fr">Tain-l'Hermitage</fw> is already in shadow, its famous vineyard hill turning dark. This is a good town to arrive in at dusk. It is small enough to take in on foot in an evening, and it rewards the kind of unhurried, aimless walking that a river town at the end of the day is made for. So let us just walk, and get our bearings, and let the place introduce itself.

Turn and look up first, because the castle is the thing that organizes everything else. The <fw lang="fr">Château de Tournon</fw> is not a fairy-tale castle, all turrets and flags. It is a heavy, four-square fortress of pale stone, planted on a spur of granite that shoulders right up against the river, and it grew the way real castles grow, in fits and pieces, over five or six centuries. There was something defensive on this rock as far back as the tenth century. The bulk of what you see went up between the fourteenth and the sixteenth, which means that if you stand and read the walls from bottom to top you are reading the slow transition from the medieval world into the Renaissance, the moment when a building stops being purely a machine for defense and starts wanting also to be beautiful. It belonged to the lords of Tournon, a family who mattered here for centuries, and that is the first thing worth holding onto about this town. This is not Paris. This is not even Lyon. For most of its history, power here was local, held by a regional family in a regional stronghold, answerable to the crown in theory and to the river in practice. All week the river has been carrying you through a France of provinces and localities, places that ran their own affairs long before a centralizing monarchy in the north reached down to gather them in. Tournon is one of those places, and its castle is the physical proof.

Now come down off the rock and into the old town, because the best of Tournon is at street level. Find your way to the <fw lang="fr">Grande Rue</fw>, the spine of the medieval quarter, and slow down. It is narrow and cobbled and it bends, the way streets do that were laid out by feet and carts and not by planners. There are Renaissance doorways here, carved lintels, houses that have leaned companionably against each other for four and five hundred years. Look for the old town gate at the southern end, the <fw lang="fr">Porte de Mauves</fw>, the surviving mouth of the vanished city wall, and understand that everything inside it was once the whole of Tournon, a walled town you could cross in ten minutes. At the northern end stands the church, the <fw lang="fr">collégiale</fw> Saint-Julien, consecrated in the early fourteenth century, its Gothic tower rising over the rooftops. If the door is open, step in for the cool and the quiet. If it is closed, no matter. The point of an evening walk is not to tick off interiors. The point is to feel the grain of the place, and the grain of Tournon is this stone, these bends, this human scale, a town built for walking because for almost all of its life walking and the river were the only ways in or out.

And that brings us to the river, and to the single most remarkable thing in Tournon, which most people stroll right past. Walk to the water and find the footbridge, the graceful pedestrian span that crosses to Tain on the far side. It looks modest, even delicate, cables and a slim deck. But that footbridge is a monument to one of the quiet revolutions of the modern world, and to a local man most Americans have never heard of, though they have ridden on his idea a thousand times.

His name was <fw lang="fr">Marc Seguin</fw>, and he was born just over the hills, in Annonay, in 1786. He was, by blood, a great-nephew of the Montgolfier brothers, the ones who put the first hot-air balloon into the sky, so invention ran in the family. And in 1825, right here between Tournon and Tain, Seguin and his brothers strung across the Rhône the first suspension bridge in continental Europe to hang its roadway from wire cables. Think about how strange and bold that was. Everyone knew you could build a bridge of stone, arch by heavy arch. Seguin proposed instead to hang a road in the air on spun-iron wire, and he had worked out the mathematics to prove it would hold. It held. The bridge you are looking at is a faithful replica of that original, kept as a footbridge now, and it marks the spot where bridge-building changed. He and his brothers would go on to build well over a hundred more across France.

But the bridge is only half of what Marc Seguin gave the world, and this is the part that reaches all the way to America. At almost the same moment, Seguin was working on the steam engine, and he solved the problem that had been holding the whole thing back. Early locomotive boilers could not make heat fast enough to be truly useful. Seguin ran the hot gases through a bundle of many small tubes surrounded by water, hugely increasing the surface where fire met water, and suddenly a boiler could raise steam quickly and steadily. He patented it in 1827. Two years later, across the Channel, George Stephenson used exactly this kind of multi-tube boiler in his famous locomotive, the Rocket, the machine that won the trials that launched the railway age. That boiler, in one form or another, is what drove the locomotives that opened the American West, that stitched a continent together with iron rails. The essential idea was worked out by a man from these hills, who tested his bridge on this very reach of the Rhône. Stand on his footbridge as the light goes, and you are standing at a source point of the modern world, in a town most travelers cannot find on a map.

There is one more ghost to greet before dinner, and he would be annoyed that we bothered. In 1863 a young English teacher arrived at the lycée here, twenty-one years old, homesick and depressed, and he hated Tournon with a poet's thoroughness. He called it a hideous hole, a dark and dirty little village, and he counted the days until he could leave. His name was <fw lang="fr">Stéphane Mallarmé</fw>, and he would become one of the most influential poets in the French language, the presiding genius of the Symbolists. And here is the thing worth carrying up the hill with you. It was in this town he despised that he did the work that made him. The early versions of his greatest poems, the ones every French schoolchild now learns, were written here, in the long provincial evenings he complained about so bitterly. Years later, softened by time, he wrote to a friend to look at poor little Tournon in passing on the boat, because it was there, he said, that he had lived his life and the absolute. Which is, in the end, the quiet lesson of a town like this. The kings and the poets and the engineers pass through, and what endures is the place itself, the cobbles and the granite and the water going by, waiting for the next traveler to arrive at dusk and be, for one evening, at the center of the world.
