---
title: Vienne, Rome, and Jazz
place: Vienne
themes: rome-centralizing-template, endurance-of-everyday-culture, france-vs-america
words: ~1300
voice-notes: numbers spelled for the ear; ancient dates read aloud
---
Walk into the center of Vienne and you will come, almost by accident, upon a Roman temple standing in the middle of a town square as if it had simply never left. This is the Temple of Augustus and Livia, and I want you to understand how strange and wonderful that is before we say anything else. It is not a jumble of fallen columns you have to squint at and imagine. It is a whole building. Six fluted Corinthian columns across the front, more running down the sides, the whole thing raised on a stone podium, complete in a way that almost nothing survives from the ancient world. It was built around the end of the first century before the common era and rededicated a few decades later, in the year forty-one of the common era, to Livia, the wife of the emperor Augustus, by her grandson, the emperor Claudius. If it reminds you of the Maison Carrée in Nîmes, that is not a coincidence and it is not a stretch. Scholars call it almost the twin of the Maison Carrée, one of the two best-preserved Roman temples anywhere in the world, and here they both are, in the south of France.

And here is the small miracle of how it survived, because it tells you something about how the ancient world lasted at all. It survived by being useful. In the early Christian centuries, and for a very long time after, the temple was turned into a church. Later it did duty as other things too, but the point is that it was never allowed to become a quarry, never picked apart for its stone the way so many Roman buildings were. People kept walking into it, kept needing it, kept a roof over it. In the middle of the nineteenth century it was carefully stripped back to its Roman form. So the building you are looking at is intact today precisely because it never stopped being used. Hold that thought, the idea that the everyday use of a thing is what preserves it, because it is going to be the whole heart of this episode.

Now, why is there a temple like this in Vienne? For the same reason there was one in Arles, the reason we keep circling back to on this trip. Vienne was Rome. Its Roman name was Vienna, and before the Romans it had been the capital of a Gallic people called the Allobroges. Julius Caesar's world absorbed it, and by around the year forty-seven before the common era it had become a Roman colony, a proper Roman city on the Rhône, and a rich one. And when Rome made a city, it made it from a kit. This is the idea I flagged back in Arles and again at the Pont du Gard, and Vienne is where you can almost hold it in your hands. Rome had a standard set of parts it stamped onto every important town: a forum at the center, a temple to the emperor and the state gods, a theater, an amphitheater, baths, an aqueduct, a grid of streets. A Roman arriving in Vienne from Arles, or from North Africa, or from Syria, would have known instantly how to find his way around, because the furniture of the city was the same everywhere. That sameness was not an accident of taste. It was the physical grammar of empire, the way a single power in a single capital made a hundred different peoples legible to itself and legible to each other. The temple, standing in that square, is one piece of that kit, still in its slot two thousand years later.

There are other pieces scattered around town. There is the Pyramid, a tall, tapering stone monument that looks a little mysterious until you learn what it is. It is the spina, the central spine, of Vienne's Roman circus, the long barrier that chariots would have thundered around during races. The circus is gone; the spine remains. And across the Rhône, at a place called Saint-Romain-en-Gal, there is a whole excavated Roman quarter, streets and workshops and grand houses, with mosaic floors of extraordinary quality, scenes of gods and geometry and daily life laid out one small stone at a time. Vienne, in other words, was not a garrison outpost. It was a real city, wealthy and cultured, high Roman culture living in what an American might think of as a provincial river town. Keep that phrase too, high culture in a provincial town, because Vienne is about to do it again, in our own time, in a way I find genuinely thrilling.

Because now we climb the hillside to the theater. The Roman theater of Vienne is cut into the slope of the hill, a great fan of stone seating, and it was one of the largest theaters in all of Roman Gaul, second only to the one at Autun. In its Roman heyday it could seat something like thirteen thousand people. Like so much here, it disappeared, buried under earth and centuries and later buildings, until it was excavated and restored in the early twentieth century, roughly in the decades before the Second World War. And this is where the story turns, and where I hope you are already smiling, because you know where we are going.

Since the year nineteen eighty-one, that Roman theater has been the home of Jazz à Vienne. Every summer, for a couple of weeks, the ancient theater fills with something like seven thousand people, and jazz pours out of that two-thousand-year-old stone bowl under the open evening sky. It was started by a man named Jean-Paul Boutellier, and the first festival opened in July of nineteen eighty-one. And the names who have played that stone stage are the names on your best records. Ella Fitzgerald sang there. Miles Davis played there. Stan Getz, Ray Charles. The list runs on for decades and it is still running; the festival is one of the great jazz festivals of Europe.

Now let me draw the line across the Atlantic, because this is the loop I have been wanting to hand you all along, and I will tell you plainly which parts are fact and which are my own reading. The fact is this: jazz is America's art form. It was born in New Orleans, out of the African-American experience, out of the blues and the church and the brass band and the collision of everything that met at the mouth of the Mississippi. It is, arguably, the single most original thing the United States ever gave the world. And France fell for it, hard and early and lastingly. That too is fact. In the middle of the twentieth century, Paris became a haven for American jazz musicians, and in particular for Black American musicians who found in France a respect and an ease they were too often denied at home. The clarinetist and soprano saxophonist Sidney Bechet, a New Orleans man, took up permanent residence in France in the early nineteen fifties and was adored there until his death in nineteen fifty-nine. The great bebop pianist Bud Powell left New York for Paris in nineteen fifty-nine. The drummer Kenny Clarke, one of the founding architects of bebop, settled in Paris and stayed. They played in the clubs of the Left Bank to rooms full of French listeners who took the music with complete seriousness.

Here is the part that is my interpretation, and I offer it as such. Stand in that Roman theater on a summer night with seven thousand French men and women around you, listening to American music made by the descendants of enslaved people, in a stone theater built by an empire to project its own order across the world, and you are standing inside one of the loveliest loops I know. Rome stamped its culture outward from a center onto the provinces. Two thousand years later the provinces are still using the building, but the culture flowing through it now traveled the other way, from a former colony across the ocean, from New Orleans to the Left Bank to this hillside. The theater did not care. It was built to gather people to hear a performance, and that is exactly, precisely, what it is still doing. The empire is gone. The impulse to climb a hill on a warm night and hear somebody play, that is the thing that never died. That is what I would have you carry out of Vienne, humming.
