---
title: Silk, Revolt, and the Canuts
place: Lyon (Croix-Rousse)
themes: fate-of-classes, distributed-vs-centralized-power, france-vs-america
words: ~1300
---

Look up. That is where this story starts, on the hill above the two rivers, the one Lyon calls the Croix-Rousse. You will notice the windows first. They are enormous, absurdly tall for ordinary houses, reaching nearly floor to ceiling, and they are everywhere on this hill. The buildings themselves have those same stretched proportions, ceilings that seem too high for the rooms below them. Locals have a name for this neighborhood. They call it la colline qui travaille, the hill that works. And once you know what those windows were for, you cannot unsee it.

Because these were not houses in the way we mean the word. They were workshops. In the early eighteen hundreds this hill was the beating heart of the European silk trade, and behind each of those tall windows stood a machine, a loom, so large it needed a room of its own. The workers who ran them were called the canuts, the silk weavers of Lyon, and the whole architecture of this hill was shaped around their craft. The high ceilings were not luxury. They were necessity. The loom that transformed everything here was something like thirteen feet tall, and you simply could not fit it under a normal roof.

That loom carried a name you may know from somewhere unexpected: Jacquard. Joseph Marie Jacquard was a Lyon man who, in the very first years of the nineteenth century, patented in eighteen oh four a device that let a loom weave complicated patterns almost by itself. And here is the part that should make anyone who has ever touched a computer sit up. It worked by punched cards. A chain of stiff cards, each punched with a pattern of holes, fed through the machine one after another. Where there was a hole, a thread lifted. Where there was no hole, it stayed down. The cards were, in the most literal sense, a program. Change the cards, change the cloth. It meant a single weaver could produce fabric of a complexity that had taken guild masters lifetimes to command.

Now, let me flag something carefully here, because this is a place where a good story tends to outrun the facts. You will hear, on this hill and in a hundred books, that the Jacquard loom was the ancestor of the computer. That claim is partly true and often overstated, so let me separate the two threads. The solid part is this: Charles Babbage, the English mathematician who designed the first true general-purpose calculating engine, knew the Jacquard loom directly and admired it. He owned a woven silk portrait of Jacquard, itself produced from thousands of punched cards, and he explicitly planned to feed instructions into his Analytical Engine using cards on the Jacquard principle. That link is real and documented. The shakier part is the leap from there to the American punched-card machines, the ones Herman Hollerith built to count the United States census of eighteen ninety, the machines that grew into the company we now call I B M. Hollerith certainly used punched cards. Whether he took the idea from Jacquard directly, or arrived at it by another road, is genuinely disputed by historians, and you should treat the neat straight line from a Lyon loom to Silicon Valley as a story people love more than a lineage they have proven. What is fair to say is that the idea born on this hill, that you could store instructions as holes in a card and hand a machine its orders, is one of the deep ideas of the modern world. That much the canuts gave us.

But the loom is only the machinery. The human story is harder, and it is the reason this hill matters to an American as much as to a Lyonnais. Because the canuts were not factory hands in the sense we picture. They were skilled craftspeople, often working their own looms in their own rooms, and yet they did not own the thing that mattered. They did not own the silk, and they did not set the price. The merchants down in the city, the ones who supplied the raw thread and sold the finished cloth, controlled what a weaver earned. And in the hard years around eighteen thirty-one, as the wider economy sagged, those merchants cut what they paid. A skilled craft, a thirteen-foot machine, a hill full of expertise, and still a family could not be sure of eating.

So the canuts made a demand that sounds utterly modern. They asked for a tarif, a fixed minimum price for their work. Not charity, not revolution, at least not at first: simply a floor, a guaranteed rate below which the merchants could not push them. The regional official, the prefect, actually brokered such a rate. And then over a hundred of the merchants refused to honor it, invoking the freedom of commerce, the sacred right to pay whatever the market would bear. And that refusal is the hinge of the whole thing. Here is the question underneath it, the one that has never really gone away: who has the right to a living wage, and who gets to decide? The people who do the work, organized among themselves on their own hill? Or the market, and behind the market, the state in far-off Paris?

In November of eighteen thirty-one the canuts rose. They came down off the Croix-Rousse and they took the city, and for a few days Lyon belonged to its workers. They carried a black flag, and stitched across it was a phrase that still gives me chills to say out loud: Vivre en travaillant ou mourir en combattant. To live working, or to die fighting. Read it again slowly. It is not a demand for the world turned upside down. It is a demand to be allowed to work and to live from that work, with dying only the alternative if that is refused. The central government answered with force. Marshal Soult marched some twenty thousand soldiers on the city and retook it. Three years later, in eighteen thirty-four, the canuts rose again, and this time the suppression was worse, a bloody week of street fighting with hundreds killed, the army retaking the hill piece by piece on orders from the interior minister in Paris.

Here interpretation matters, so let me be honest about mine. It is tempting to romanticize this, to make the canuts into pure heroes and their revolts into a clean prophecy of everything that came after. I would resist that. These were confused, desperate, sometimes chaotic uprisings, and they failed. But the friedrich Engels line, that eighteen thirty-one on this hill was among the first true risings of the industrial working class, is not empty. This happened more than a decade before Karl Marx and Engels wrote a word together. Nobody handed these weavers an ideology. They worked one out from the loom itself, from the daily arithmetic of thread and bread, and they discovered, before the theory existed, that a class of people who make things might have interests of their own and the power to press them.

And that is the thread that ties this hill to home. When you look at those tall windows now, think of the shoemakers of Lynn, the mill women of Lowell, the early American labor movement forming in the same decades across the ocean, asking the same blunt question about a fair price for work. The Croix-Rousse was among the first places anyone shouted it. The looms have mostly gone quiet; a handful of artisans still work Jacquard hand looms up here, for the restoration of old palaces and churches. But the traboules remain, those covered passages threading through the buildings, the sheltered shortcuts the weavers used to carry finished silk down to the river without the rain ruining it. Walk through one before you leave this hill. You are walking the exact path the cloth took, and, in a way, the path the whole argument about who deserves a living took, on its way down into the modern world.
