---
title: Fourvière and the Two Hills
place: Lyon (Fourvière)
themes: church-vs-state, rome-centralizing-template, endurance-of-everyday-life
words: ~1300
voice-notes: numbers spelled for the ear; ancient dates read aloud
---
Stand up at the Basilica of Notre-Dame de Fourvière, on the western hill, with your back to all that ornate stone, and look out over Lyon. The two rivers, the Saône and the Rhône, coming together below you. The old city at your feet, the roofs going on and on toward the mountains, and on a clear day, off to the east, the white teeth of the Alps and maybe Mont Blanc. This is the postcard view, and I want to use it as a doorway, because the hill you are standing on has been the high ground of this city for two thousand years, and it has meant very different things to the people who climbed it.

The Lyonnais have a saying about their two hills, and it is one of those local phrases that turns out to hold a whole argument inside it. Fourvière, the hill you are standing on, is la colline qui prie, the hill that prays. Across the valley of the Saône rises the other hill, Croix-Rousse, and that one is la colline qui travaille, the hill that works. The hill that prays and the hill that works. Fourvière is crowded with churches and convents and this enormous basilica; Croix-Rousse is where the silk weavers, the canuts, ran their looms in tall bare rooms and, more than once in the eighteen hundreds, rose up in some of the first great worker revolts of the industrial age. Prayer on one hill, labor on the other. Hold that image. We are going to come back to it, because it is neater than the truth and truer than most neat things.

But first, look down at what is right beneath you, because the hill that prays was, for centuries, the hill that ruled. Just below the basilica, cut into the slope, are two Roman theaters, and they are not fragments behind a fence. The larger one was built under the emperor Augustus, around fifteen years before the common era, and in its final form it seated something like ten thousand people. And here is the thing that ought to give you a small chill: it still works. Every summer there is a festival called the Nuits de Fourvière, the Nights of Fourvière, and people file into that Roman stone to hear concerts and see plays, exactly as people did when Augustus was alive. Two thousand years, and the hill still gathers a crowd where the Romans built it to gather.

Because this was Rome. Not a Roman-flavored town, but one of the great cities of the Roman West. In the year forty-three before the common era, a Roman commander named Lucius Munatius Plancus founded a colony here at the meeting of the rivers, and named it Lugdunum. And Lugdunum did not stay small. It became the capital of the Three Gauls, the administrative capital from which Rome governed the whole sprawl of conquered Gaul, the hub where the imperial roads came together and radiated out. Two emperors were born in this city, Claudius and, much later, Caracalla. And down at the foot of the hills the Romans built a great federal sanctuary, an altar where representatives of some sixty Gallic tribes gathered once a year to perform the imperial cult, the worship of Rome and the emperor as something close to divine. Think about what that means. Rome did not only govern Gaul from here; it made loyalty into a religion and staged it here, on this ground, every year. The sacred and the state, fused into one ceremony.

Now let me hand you the idea I most want you to carry out of Lyon, and I will flag it as interpretation, not plain fact. Look again at the hill under your feet. The Romans made it the seat of a state religion, emperor-worship as an instrument of imperial unity. And then, eighteen centuries later, the French crowned that same hill with a Catholic basilica, another fusion of the sacred and the powerful, a different god, a different empire of belief, planted on the identical high ground. Two answers, laid one on top of the other, to the same old question every civilization has to answer: what is the relationship between the thing you worship and the thing that rules you. That layering is not an accident of geography. High ground is where power has always wanted to be seen.

Which brings us to the basilica itself, and to a story more pointed than a tourist plaque usually tells. It was built between about eighteen seventy-two and eighteen ninety-six, in a lavish Romano-Byzantine style, all gold mosaic and marble, by an architect named Pierre Bossan. The official reason is a vow. In eighteen seventy, during the war with Prussia, the city fathers of Lyon promised that if the city were spared, they would build a great church to the Virgin. Lyon was spared, and here is the church. That much is fact, and it is the story you will hear on the hill.

But here is the interpretation, and it is where the church-versus-state theme comes roaring in. That war ended in humiliating French defeat, and out of the wreckage came the Third Republic, a republic that was aggressively secular, anticlerical, suspicious of the Church's grip on French life. And the great Catholic monuments of exactly these years, Fourvière here in Lyon and the Sacré-Cœur up on Montmartre in Paris, were built with private Catholic money as something more than thanks. Many historians read them as triumphal, defiant statements, gigantic offerings meant to expiate what conservative Catholics saw as the sins of a modern, godless, revolutionary France, and to plant the flag of the Church on the highest ground of the city just as the secular republic was trying to push religion to the margins. That is why the basilica sits where it sits, blazing white over the city. It was, in part, an argument in stone. And the argument was not subtle at the time: around the turn of the century, one anticlerical mayor of Lyon called Fourvière a citadel of superstition. All of this is rolling toward the year nineteen oh five, when France formally separated church and state and made secularism, laïcité, the law of the land, the settlement France still lives by today.

And here is a quiet thread across the Atlantic for you. Americans built no basilica on a hill to fight their government, and yet Americans stitch God and nation together in a way the French find genuinely baffling: God on the money, God in the pledge, presidents ending speeches by asking God to bless the country. That is a kind of civic religion the French deliberately walled off. France looked at the fusion of altar and state, the very thing staged on this hill by two different empires, and decided the safest thing was to keep them apart by law. Two republics, both children of the eighteenth century, made opposite bets about the sacred and the state. You can stand on Fourvière and feel the weight of the bet France made.

Now come back down to the two hills, and let the everyday have the last word, because it always does. The basilica is magnificent, and the Roman theaters are astonishing, and the emperors and the mayors and the archbishops fought their long argument over who gets to stand on the high ground and be worshiped. But look down into the valley between the hills. That is where Lyon actually lives. The markets, the bouchons where they serve you quenelles and sausage and too much cream, the traboules threaded between the buildings, the ordinary business of a working city that has fed itself and argued with itself and outlasted every empire that ever tried to rule it from the top of a hill. The hill prays. The other hill works. And down in the middle, quietly, between prayer and labor and beneath all the monuments, the city just goes on being a city. That is the thing that endures. Not the power on the high ground. The life in the valley below it.
