---
title: Olive Oil and Butter — France's Three Kitchens
place: France (food, thematic)
themes: distributed-vs-centralized-power, terroir, food-as-culture
words: ~1300
---

There is a line that runs across France that you will never see on any map, and yet it may be the truest border the country has. It is not a line of language or of politics. It is a line of fat. South of it, people cook in olive oil. North of it, and through the great middle of the country, they cook in butter and cream. And the remarkable thing is where that line falls — it crosses right around the city of Lyon, which sits at the seam between the two worlds, close enough to draw on both. I want to spend this episode standing on that line, because your whole trip is going to walk across it. You will start in Paris, in the north, and then you will sail down the Rhône from Arles, which is deep in the oil country of the south, up to Lyon, which is the hinge. You are, in the most literal culinary sense, going to travel from one France to another.

Here is the idea I keep coming back to, and I want to flag it up front as interpretation, not settled fact — it is a way of reading the country, not a law of nature. France is famously one of the most centralized nations on earth. Everything runs to Paris. The roads, the rail, the power, the prestige. And yet at the table, France stubbornly refuses to be one thing. The central state built a single nation and never managed to build a single cuisine. What survived instead is a federation of table cultures, held apart by climate and geography and, quietly, by class. So let me give you the three registers you are about to taste, because they really are three different ways of thinking about food.

Start in the south, in Provence, because for you this is home turf even if you have never been. This is the cooking closest to your Italian and Mediterranean heart, and I mean that almost literally. Provence and the Italian region of Liguria, just across the border around Genoa, are essentially the same kitchen speaking two languages. The sun does the work here. Olive trees thrive in that dry, rocky, hot southern ground, so the fat is olive oil, and around it you get the whole bright vocabulary — garlic, tomatoes, anchovy, and the herbs that grow wild on the hillsides, thyme and rosemary and basil. Think of ratatouille, that slow melt of eggplant and zucchini and pepper and tomato. Think of tapenade, which is essentially crushed olives and anchovy and capers, a paste of pure salt and sun. Think of aïoli, garlic pounded into oil until it becomes a golden mayonnaise. And then think of the one that gives the whole game away — pistou. Pistou is basil and garlic and olive oil pounded together, and if that sounds exactly like Italian pesto, that is because it is its first cousin. Most food historians will tell you pistou was very likely adapted from the Genovese pesto next door, and the tell is what it leaves out. Classic pistou has no pine nuts, and often no cheese, because rural Provence was poor and those were luxuries. The Provençal soupe au pistou is basically a French minestrone with a dollop of that green paste stirred in at the end. When you eat in Arles, you are eating the French dialect of a Mediterranean language you already speak.

Now sail north up the Rhône to Lyon and everything changes. The fat changes, the mood changes, the whole philosophy changes. This is butter and cream and pork. Lyon sits inland at a crossroads of rivers and trade, surrounded by rich farmland and, in the hills, by pigs. So the cooking is heavier, meatier, dairy-fed. This is the land of the quenelle, a poached dumpling of pike bound with cream and egg and served under a rich sauce. It is the land of charcuterie — the rosette de Lyon, a fat pink cured sausage, and every imaginable use of the pig. And it carries a particular social history worth knowing. The soul of Lyonnais cooking was shaped by the mères lyonnaises, the mothers of Lyon — women who had cooked in the kitchens of the bourgeois families and then, in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, left to open their own small restaurants, the bouchons. Cooks like Eugénie Brazier took humble ingredients, the pork and the tripe and the pike, and elevated them with serious technique until they earned Michelin stars. So Lyonnais food is bourgeois food that came down the stairs into a working-class room. Rich, but unpretentious. Butter, not oil.

And then there is Paris, which is the odd one out, because Paris is not really a produce region at all. Paris grows almost nothing. What Paris does is eat everything. It is the centralizing capital, and its genius is absorption — it pulls the whole country's larder toward itself and turns it into restaurants. This is where haute cuisine was codified, where Auguste Escoffier around the turn of the twentieth century systematized classic French technique into the grammar that professional kitchens still use, largely built on butter. But Paris is also the bistro, those little wine-and-food rooms that grew up in the eighteen hundreds to feed city workers, and the brasserie, the grand Belle Époque halls with their brass and mirrors. And here is my favorite proof that Paris eats the country rather than growing it. The great brasserie seafood platter — the plateau de fruits de mer, that tiered tower of oysters and shellfish on ice — became a Parisian institution in the late nineteenth century precisely because the railways could finally bring fresh seafood inland from the coast fast enough. Paris is hundreds of miles from any ocean, and yet it became one of the great oyster cities of the world, because centralized France built the rail to carry the sea to the capital. That platter is centralization you can eat.

Let me make this useful to you as a cook, because the cleanest way to feel the difference is to imagine handing the same chicken to a cook in each place. The Provençal cook rubs it with olive oil, tucks garlic and thyme and rosemary under the skin, maybe throws in olives and tomato and a strip of orange peel, and lets the sun-flavors do the talking. The Lyonnais cook browns it in butter and finishes it in cream, perhaps with mushrooms or vinegar, something rich and bound and glossy. Same bird, two philosophies of fat. And the Parisian cook might do either, because Paris borrows both — but will plate it with technique, with a proper reduction, with restaurant polish. That is the whole country on one chicken.

I will close on the through-line, and flag it again as interpretation. This oil-versus-butter map is a broad stroke — the southwest cooks in duck fat, plenty of regions braise in wine, and any French cook will tell you the line is fuzzier in life than on paper. But the broad truth holds, and I think it holds a lesson we know at home. Because America is no different. We also have an olive-oil-and-butter-shaped food map — the Cajun south, New England, the Lowcountry, the Southwest — and "American food" is as much a convenient myth as "French food." There is no single French cuisine. There is Provence with its oil and its sun, Lyon with its butter and its pigs, and Paris eating all of it. A nation politically ruled from one city, and gastronomically ungovernable. Taste your way up the Rhône, and you are tasting the argument itself.
